The Regulatory Wrecking Ball

For all of President Trump’s boasts tbehat he is a man of action, he is likely to close out his first 100 days with no major legislation to his credit. That may actually be for the best, since his most significant effort so far would have destroyed the Affordable Care Act.
And yet, even without a big win, Mr. Trump has done significant damage with smaller-bore measures, whose cumulative impact will be felt for a very long time. Specifically, he has signed into law 11 regulatory rollback measures, passed by Republican majorities using the Congressional Review Act — a law that lets lawmakers use fast-track procedures to repeal rules completed in the last six months or so of a previous administration. Two more repeal measures await Mr. Trump’s signature, and 20 that have been introduced in Congress could be passed before fast-track procedures expire. At least there will be no more ugly surprises, since the deadline for introducing new rollback measures under the Congressional Review Act passed on March 30.
The wreckage has been extensive. Some of the regulations already repealed would have strengthened health, safety and fair pay protections for workers. Several others were environmental protections, including a rule, repealed this week, for protecting bears and wolves on federal refuges in Alaska from “predator control” techniques used by the state to accommodate hunters. Mr. Trump has also rolled back broadband privacy protections, antibribery standards for oil companies operating abroad, expanded background checks for mentally ill gun buyers and educational assessment standards for public schools.
Many of the measures that have been introduced but not yet passed by both chambers are environmental protections, including a rule that would limit emissions of methane, a powerful global warming gas, rules and regulations to protect wildlife habitats and endangered species, and safeguards against oil drilling in the Arctic and in national parks.
These regulatory rollbacks, enacted or proposed, generally favor a big corporate constituent, a narrow special interest or an ideological purpose. The broad public has not demanded the rollbacks — and will not be served by them. That is probably why Mr. Trump has signed many of these measures in private, without the pomp of presidential bill signings. There is nothing here for most Americans to celebrate.
Nor is the damage easily undone. When a regulation is repealed using the Congressional Review Act, agencies are blocked from issuing “substantially similar” rules without express authorization from Congress.
So far, Mr. Trump has signed most of the rollback measures Congress has sent him and given no indication that he would refuse to sign any of those under consideration in Congress. But one thing is clear. The more of these measures he signs, the worse off the public will be.


Downsizing Mr. Bannon

President Trump’s decision to remove Stephen Bannon, his chief political adviser, from his post as a principal on the National Security Council has led to no end of speculation in Washington, some of it inspired by Mr. Bannon’s rivals in the White House, that this is the beginning of the end of Mr. Bannon’s outsize influence and payback for his role in the administration’s early missteps. But whatever the fallout bureaucratically, on a substantive level the move was a welcome course correction, removing a contentious and extremist political voice from a vitally important policy-making body and thus making it more likely that people with actual expertise will help an inexperienced president make tough choices. That need was driven home as reports came in that the administration had ordered air strikes in Syria in response to its use of chemical weapons.
No presidential adviser in recent memory had so brazenly tried to consolidate power as Mr. Bannon, who moved quickly to establish himself not just as Mr. Trump’s Svengali, but as a kind of de facto president. One sign was an executive order, framed by Mr. Bannon, and issued after the inauguration, that named him to the council’s principals committee, which includes the vice president, secretaries of state and defense and other top officials. It is the primary policy-making body that decides national security questions that do not rise to the level of the president, and it frames the debate over matters that do.
Previous presidents have decided that such decisions should be separate from politics; Karl Rove, George W. Bush’s chief political adviser, was barred from council meetings. Mr. Bannon’s appointment was thus widely condemned, not only because he was a political adviser but also because he was a particularly combative one. Mr. Trump, angry he was not warned about the implications of the appointment, briefly considered rescinding it immediately, then did not, fearing even more furor.
The new order has to be seen as a victory for Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, the new national security adviser and a respected professional who reportedly insisted on purging Mr. Bannon in an effort to ensure that profound decisions about the country’s security are made without regard to political calculation.
Mr. Trump’s order also corrected another error in the original directive, restoring the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the director of national intelligence to the committee. The committee membership has been expanded, and will now include the energy secretary, the C.I.A. director and the United Nations ambassador.
Mr. Bannon, aided by Breitbart News, the alt-right platform he brought to prominence, has tried to spin his removal as a natural evolution in the administration’s governance strategy. He says he was put on the committee to watch over Michael Flynn, Mr. Trump’s first national security adviser, and that with Mr. Flynn out of the picture, his presence was no longer required. Yet if the White House leak machine is to be believed, his influence was already in decline and he had lost favor with other advisers, including Mr. Trump’s daughter and son-in-law, who have been embarrassed by big defeats on important issues like health care and immigration that Mr. Bannon has had a hand in.
Mr. Bannon still has his security clearance, still has Mr. Trump’s ear and still apparently is running a policy shop that is viewed as a competitor to the council. Among those working for Mr. Bannon is Sebastian Gorka, a counterterrorism adviser and founder of an extreme right-wing party in Hungary in 2007; The Forward has published articles saying that Mr. Gorka publicly supported a violent, racist and anti-Semitic paramilitary militia that was later banned as a threat to minorities by multiple court rulings. If such charges are true, Mr. Gorka obviously should not be working for the White House.
And the president’s messages have been confusing on Russia, China, North Korea and especially on Syria. Mr. Bannon’s departure gives General McMaster an opening to bring more professional discipline to policy making. Mr. Trump should help him do so.


Terror Respects No Borders, Sympathy Shouldn’t Either

After Monday’s terrorist attack on the subway in St. Petersburg, some Russian state media outlets noted that expressions of grief and solidarity in the West were far fewer than after attacks on targets in Western countries. No “Je suis Charlie”; no projection of the Russian flag onto the Brandenburg Gate, which has been illumined in the past in the colors of Britain, Israel, Turkey and France; and though the lights on the Eiffel Tower were doused, the gesture came only after criticism on social media of Paris authorities.
There is little question that the United States and Western Europe give considerably more attention to attacks on their territory or their people than to attacks elsewhere. The frequent suicide bombings in Muslim conflict zones rarely attract much sympathetic outpouring on social media — in the West, or, for that matter, in Russia.
What seemed to vex the Russians, however, or at least the Russian state media, was what they saw as a double standard that further proved the Kremlin’s propaganda about a West out to get Russia.
Russia under President Vladimir Putin is in fact in very low esteem in the West, and its defense of its ally, President Bashar al-Assad, over the heinous chemical attack in Syria only lowered that.
Yet elemental human sympathy should not be entangled in geopolitics. Russia is as vulnerable to the plague of Islamist terrorism as any Western nation, with large Muslim populations both in Russia and around its borders.
After 130 people in Paris were killed to spread terror in 2015, Russians brought flowers, candles and notes of support to the French Embassy in Moscow in a spontaneous outpouring of sympathy. The 14 who died in St. Petersburg were also people just going about their lives — a wrestling coach, some students, a doll maker. They too deserve flowers and tears.
People of good will should open their hearts and minds to the tragic and unnecessary suffering of all victims of terror, whether it is Russians caught in a hail of shrapnel in a subway car, or Syrians torturously killed in the chemical attack, or the 31 people killed on Wednesday in attacks in Tikrit, Iraq. None of them deserved this.


Rising Risks for Retirement Savers

As America’s population ages, opportunities for a secure retirement should increase. But the opposite is happening. And things are likely to get worse in the Trump years.
A measure passed recently by congressional Republicans and awaiting President Trump’s all-but-certain signature will reverse a rule, passed in the last year of the Obama administration, allowing cities and counties to organize savings plans for private-sector workers who have no employer-provided retirement coverage. Another measure, blocking states from sponsoring similar retirement savings plans, was passed by the House in February. The Senate and Mr. Trump would be wise to let that measure die. If it is enacted, 13 million people — a sizable portion of the 55 million Americans who don’t have company retirement plans — would be denied access to payroll-deduction individual retirement accounts.
People who already have retirement plans also have cause for worry. On Wednesday, the Labor Department carried out Mr. Trump’s directive to delay the April 10 effective date of a federal rule that requires financial advisers to put a client’s interest before their own when giving advice or selling investments related to 401(k) rollovers and other retirement transactions. The rule, known as the “best interest” or "fiduciary” standard, would protect 401(k) savers from being steered into overly expensive strategies and products when they retire. All of these rules were carefully researched and written. All are much needed. And all are being tampered with for one reason only: The financial industry does not want them because it makes tens of billions of dollars a year under a status quo in which its products and practices are the only game in town for retirement savers. This means that what congressional Republicans and Mr. Trump are doing is looking for ways to line Wall Street’s pockets with the retirement savings of working people.
The result will be continuing hardship for retirees. The roughly one-half of private-sector workers who do not have retirement plans at work will rely on Social Security for between half to all of their income in retirement. But even those with retirement savings will be hard pressed. A recent paper by the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College showed that pension wealth — from traditional pensions and 401(k)’s — remained basically flat for workers ages 51 to 56 from 1992 to 2010. (The figures may show improvement in the 2016 data, due out next year, but they are unlikely to buck a nearly 20-year trend.)
The study also found that even as overall pension wealth held steady, the shift from traditional pensions to 401(k)’s left people worse off in retirement. Traditional pensions guarantee constant monthly payments for life; 401(k)’s can and do run out. In addition, the income generated by 401(k)’s varies with interest rates, which have been very low for very long.
To improve those outcomes, the study recommends expanding coverage to those whose employers do not offer a retirement plan. That is precisely what the state-based retirement plans now in Republicans’ cross hairs would do. It also recommends ways to make 401(k)’s work better. One would be to ensure that hard-earned savings aren’t siphoned off by self-serving advisers — but Mr. Trump has put the brakes on that effort.
A third recommendation is that policy makers wake up to the fact that future retirees will be more reliant on Social Security than those in the past. Mr. Trump has said he won’t reduce Social Security. But his actions so far do not inspire confidence that the needs of current and future retirees are particularly high on his agenda.


The Wrong Move on Student Loans

The Obama administration made the right call in 2015 when it barred debt collectors from gouging borrowers who default on student loans and then agree to payment plans that let them make good on the debt and rebuild their ruined credit.
Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, showing more concern for the lending industry — which is essentially on the federal dole — than the borrowers the industry ought to serve, recently rescinded the directive, allowing the companies, known as guaranty agencies, to charge a predatory 16 percent fee on the debt.
Federal student loan defaults are dragging on the economy — making it impossible for people to buy cars or homes — and are increasingly following people into old age, where their Social Security benefits are being garnished for loan payments.
People who default often do so because they do not know about income-based repayment plans that might cost as little as zero dollars per month. The guaranty agencies, which collect defaulted federally guaranteed loans made through banks, share some responsibility. But the loan servicers, which collect direct student loans and are supposed to guide people through the repayment process, can be especially destructive.
Many of them neglect to inform borrowers of their options, because doing so takes too much time, and will now be allowed to once again collect exorbitant fees when borrowers end up in default. This problem was highlighted in lawsuits that the federal Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the attorneys general of Washington and Illinois filed against the country’s largest loan servicer, Navient.
Among other things, the suits charged that the company saved itself money by steering borrowers away from affordable payment plans and toward options that cut company costs but were more expensive for borrowers. In a particularly striking admission, the company argued in its court filings last month that it had no responsibility to act as a “fiduciary counselor” and that there was “no expectation that the servicer will ‘act in the interest of the consumer.’ ”
Given that thinking, it should come as no surprise that more than 1.1 million people in the federal direct student loan program defaulted in 2016 alone — a rate of about 3,000 per day.
The Education Department’s decision to let guaranty agencies gouge struggling people is indefensible — not least because the additional fees bear no relationship at all to the expenses incurred by the companies. In addition to being unfair on its face, the decision to allow these fees will be likely to make the default problem worse.


President Trump’s Most Important Meeting

Donald Trump’s meeting with his Chinese counterpart this week will be the most important diplomatic encounter of his presidency so far. His two days of talks at Mar-a-Lago with President Xi Jinping will test whether the two men — Mr. Trump an unpredictable novice, Mr. Xi a tightly scripted, experienced leader — can begin to effectively manage the world’s most significant bilateral relationship.
By undoing American support for an international agreement on climate change, repudiating an Asia-oriented trade deal and calling for funding cuts for the United Nations, Mr. Trump has already ceded leadership in key areas to Mr. Xi, who is eager to expand Beijing’s role as an international power and has increasingly positioned his country as a competitor of the United States. It will be disastrous for America and the world if Mr. Trump continues on this disengagement path.
Mr. Trump does seem to appreciate the threat from North Korea’s rapidly advancing nuclear and missile programs, putting that matter at the top of his agenda. He could hardly avoid it, given the fact that the North conducted another missile test on Tuesday as Mr. Xi was en route to the United States.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly made clear that he expects China, the North’s main supplier of food and fuel, to increase pressure beyond what it has been willing to do so far to force an end to the weapons programs. In an interview in The Financial Times on Monday, he was even more demanding, warning that the United States would take unilateral action to eliminate the nuclear threat if Beijing fails to act, presumably by curbing trade and assistance.
Analysts say China may be willing to increase pressure somewhat on North Korea, but well short of causing the regime in Pyongyang to collapse. Most experts believe that the North will not abandon its nuclear program unless the leadership at the top changes. China opposes this because it fears a surge of refugees into its territory and wants to keep North Korea as a buffer against a potentially unified Korean Peninsula dominated by the American military.
The United States and China may have a long-shot chance at an achievable solution if they agree to increase sanctions on North Korea and pursue more modest goals — halting North Korean missile tests and curbing the production of additional nuclear weapons — but there has been no serious sign of interest from the Trump administration.
Trade is another area where agreement is likely to be difficult, especially since these issues are still being fiercely debated inside the administration. During the campaign, Mr. Trump talked tough on China, promising to impose heavy tariffs on imports. But he has not followed through, and recently told The Financial Times that he hoped to reach some kind of deal with Mr. Xi. Administration officials said they hoped the summit meeting might produce concrete results, though that may be a lot to ask of the first encounter.
The risk in this meeting is that Mr. Trump knows little about diplomacy with China and does not have a team of China experts in place. He has already had to correct one major error; after calling into question America’s longstanding one-China policy, he retreated and told Mr. Xi in February that he would respect Beijing as the sole government of China and not recognize Taiwan.
The meeting is also a test for Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and close adviser, who, while also lacking foreign policy and government experience, has played a dominant role as the primary interlocutor with the Chinese, thus eclipsing Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. Administration officials are confident that Mr. Trump can hold his own; Chinese officials say the same of Mr. Xi. Much is riding on whether they can do business.


Yevgeny Yevtushenko, Who Saw Life and Poetry as a Bowl of Borscht

Yevgeny Yevtushenko, who died on Saturday at age 83, lived for the big stage. He personified the cultural “thaw” of the Soviet Sixties, shouting the short, rhythmic lines of his poems in packed, ecstatic stadiums. He projected himself as a man of the people, a Siberian who spoke the truth and battled taboos. He wore outrageous suits and outrageous ties and had unbounded energy. Nobody, as he quipped at a gala for his 60th birthday, ever accused him of excessive modesty.
Boring he was not. I vividly remember one visit to Mr. Yevtushenko’s large, wooden dacha in Peredelkino, a forested writers’ compound outside Moscow where he has asked to be buried, to talk about his autobiographical film, “Kindergarten.” He began by making me eat an apple fermented in honey — a gift from Siberia, he declared, slurping one down himself. It was fizzy, mushy and sticky, not something I’d consume by choice, but Mr. Yevtushenko proclaimed it an elemental Russian experience, akin to leaping through a hole in Siberian ice.
If his film had a flaw, he declared with characteristic bravado, it was that he had wanted to say too much. “In poetry and literature, I am among those people who believe that too much is indispensable. I, for example, do not like poems that resemble hay compressed into a geometrically perfect cube. I like it when the hay, unkempt, uncombed, with dry berries mixed in it, thrown together gaily and freely, bounces along atop some truck.”
A quick shift of imagery: “I write poetry, prose, and everything I do, I do on the principle of Russian borscht. You can throw everything into it — beets, carrots, cabbage, onions, everything you want. What’s important is the result, the taste of the borscht.”
The borscht of his film did indeed include a rich variety of ingredients, from the gnarled faces of real Siberians to a bizarre parade through Red Square of thousands of youths carrying goldfish in bowls. Not all critics liked his borscht, neither the film nor his poetry, but no one could ever deny the energy, and the verses stuck in memory. After his death, many a Russian site recalled these lines: “The white snows keep falling/ as if sliding on a thread…/ Oh to live and live on the earth/ But that, most likely, I can’t.”
His poetry, like that of the other superstar Russian poets who burst onto the Soviet cultural scene after Nikita Khrushchev pushed aside the pall of Stalinism — Andrei Voznesensky; Robert Rozhdestvensky; Bella Akhmadulina, the first of Mr. Yevtushenko’s four wives — was not meant for salons or theaters. Like the revolutionary verse of Vladimir Mayakovsky, his poetry was meant to fire up crowds on public squares and in stadiums. And of them all, the 6-foot-3, lanky, blue-eyed, rough-hewed Mr. Yevtushenko was the most identifiable, the most charismatic. The poems best known in the West — “Babi Yar,” a potent indictment of anti-Semitism, and “Stalin’s Heirs,” a warning against any return of Stalinism — stunned crowds into silence when they were read aloud.
As the ’60s faded and a new generation of dissidents came to the fore, ready for prison or exile in the battle for their human rights, Mr. Yevtushenko lost some of his glitter. It was said that he knew when to pull his punches to ensure that his books would continue to appear and he could continue traveling abroad. But that missed the point: Mr. Yevtushenko, like his fellow shestidesiatniki, did not see himself as an opponent of the Soviet system. He insisted in our interview in 1986 that he was a man of “socialist convictions.” He was the voice of what Boris Yeltsin described on Mr. Yevtushenko’s 60th birthday as the “spiritual liberation and awakening of the people of Russia” from the Stalinist nightmare. Still, his reaction to the collapse of the Soviet Union was deeply ambivalent, just as it was for the large majority of Russians. In “Goodbye, Our Red Flag,” the flag becomes both “our brother and our enemy.”
As for those who criticized his stance, Mr. Yevtushenko’s paean to the “Sixties Generation” is defiant in its pride: “We were a fad for some, some we offended with our fame. But we set you free, you envious insulters.”


The Supreme Court as Partisan Tool

Even though the Supreme Court has been an active player in American politics — Bush v. Gore leaps quickly to mind — the process of choosing its members has been seen as mattering more than the partisan combat in Congress. With rare exceptions, nominees to the court have been largely insulated from the escalating political warfare over the judiciary, and have been approved.
Justice Antonin Scalia, a conservative standard-bearer, was confirmed with 98 votes. Ruth Bader Ginsburg, a liberal icon, got 96. Even Clarence Thomas, whose confirmation hearings marked a flash point in sexual and racial politics, drew no filibuster.
Now, however, partly as a result of its own actions, but more important as a result of increasing polarization in Washington and the nation as a whole, the court is devolving into a nakedly partisan tool. How did this happen? Some of the blame rests with the Democrats. Many of them over the years have played to their base by casting cost-free votes against Republican nominees. Republicans like to say that Democrats’ 1987 blocking of Robert Bork marked the beginning of the politicization of Supreme Court nominations, but Democrats did give Mr. Bork a vote. The polarization of the court itself, with a pronounced rightward swing among its conservatives, has also helped turn confirmations into political battles.
But the lion’s share of the blame now belongs to one man — Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader. In blocking even a hearing for Judge Merrick Garland, President Barack Obama’s moderate and eminently qualified candidate, as well as dozens of Obama nominees for other positions, he deeply degraded the nominating process. There was a time when the leaders of the Senate were responsible stewards of republican traditions and ideals. Not Mr. McConnell, whose determination to steamroll and humiliate political opponents exceeds any other consideration.
Which brings us — and the nation — to the unfolding mess in the Senate over President Trump’s nomination of Judge Neil Gorsuch. On Monday, Senate Democrats secured the votes needed to filibuster Judge Gorsuch’s nomination, a procedural mechanism the Senate minority party can use to stall or block a vote by the majority. Whether Democrats will or will not remains to be seen. But many of them are still furious, and rightly so, that Mr. McConnell and the Republicans stole the seat after Justice Scalia died by denying Judge Garland a vote for eight months.
For their part, the Republicans, who want to confirm Judge Gorsuch this week, need 60 votes to overcome the filibuster. They’re a few votes short, so they have threatened a new weapon: using their 52-vote majority to eliminate the filibuster, allowing them to confirm Judge Gorsuch with a simple majority, “up or down” vote. Such a move — known as the nuclear option — would end the filibuster not just for Judge Gorsuch’s confirmation, but for all Supreme Court nominees. It would also mean that the only Senate votes still subject to the filibuster rule would be on legislation.
That leaves it to Democrats to consider whether the filibuster is worth saving. Whether legitimately outraged at Mr. McConnell’s treatment of the Garland nomination or opposed to Judge Gorsuch on the merits, if they lose the filibuster now — as they will — then it is not available to use against another Trump nominee, who may be objectionable not only to Democrats but to a few Republicans, as well. Yes, the Republicans could possibly strip the filibuster away the next time, too. But surely having some slight chance of being able to deploy it to stop a renegade justice is better than having no chance at all. And the danger some Democrats appear to fear of seeming naïve by clinging to a goal of bipartisan support for the court seems less acute than the certainty of their appearing ineffectual in a futile effort to block the Gorsuch appointment.
What matters, of course, is not some arcane voting process in the Senate. What matters is that Americans believe they are governed by law, not by whatever political party manages to stack the Supreme Court. That is what Mitch McConnell has driven the Senate to put at risk — a very great risk indeed — and it may, in the end, fall to the court itself to find a way to rise above the steadily encroaching tide of factionalism.


A New Level of Depravity, Even for Bashar al-Assad

For a world that too often seems impervious to the horrors of Syria’s civil war, the photos and videos from Tuesday’s chemical weapons attack, which killed dozens of civilians, bore witness to a new level of atrocity. People gasping for breath, turning blue, lying dead in the street — all victims of airstrikes apparently by President Bashar al-Assad’s forces.
It was the deadliest chemical attack in years in Syria, a new marker for a leader with a record of brutality dating to 2011, when he turned his weapons on peaceful protesters. A second attack on Tuesday hit a clinic treating the victims.
Chlorine gas attacks have become almost routine in northern Syria, but medical workers and other witnesses, citing the symptoms this time and the high casualties, said even more lethal nerve agents and other banned toxins were probably used. Although Mr. Assad doesn’t control the entire country, he has effectively won the war against his opponents even as a separate conflict — waged by the United States and others against the Islamic State — continues. So why this attack? Why now? It speaks to his depravity and that of his enablers, especially Russia and Iran.
Mr. Assad may think he can act with impunity now. After all, Russia, which intervened militarily in 2015 to save him from defeat by rebels, vetoed a United Nations Security Council resolution in February that would have punished Syria for using chlorine-filled barrel bombs in 2014 and 2015.
Now comes the Trump administration, which has made clear that ousting Mr. Assad is not a priority and fighting the Islamic State takes precedence. President Barack Obama, after calling for Mr. Assad’s ouster in 2011, shifted toward that same view, but only after repeated efforts to work with Russia on a political solution. Mr. Obama also had a record of condemning Mr. Assad’s atrocities and urging that he and his allies be prosecuted for war crimes.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump called the attack a “reprehensible” act “that cannot be ignored by the civilized world.” The usually invisible secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, did better. He condemned Mr. Assad by name, said he must be held accountable and pointed out that Russia and Iran “also bear great moral responsibility for these deaths.”
But the comments have little power, coming as they do after weeks of Mr. Trump voicing both distaste for America’s traditional role as a promoter of human rights and praise of authoritarian leaders, like Vladimir Putin of Russia. Mr. Trump also blamed Mr. Obama for the new attacks, citing his “weakness and irresolution” in setting a red line in 2012 against chemical weapons and then doing “nothing.” Has he conveniently forgotten September 2013 tweets telling Mr. Obama “do not attack Syria”?
In his statement, Mr. Trump ignored the fact that instead of taking military action, which Congress mostly opposed, Mr. Obama worked with Russia on a deal under which Mr. Assad agreed to dismantle his chemical munitions. Although much of the stockpile was destroyed, international inspectors later found Syria retained some capability.
More important, Mr. Trump did not say how he would respond now. He could start by supporting a strong resolution, with sanctions, at the United Nations Security Council. Given the close coordination between Mr. Assad and Russia, it is hard to believe Moscow’s insistence that it had no military role in the strike. Regardless, Russia and Iran are complicit in the brutality.


Enabling Egypt’s President Sisi, an Enemy of Human Rights

American presidents must sometimes deal with unsavory foreign leaders in pursuit of America’s national interest. But that doesn’t require inviting them to the White House and lavishing them with praise and promises of unconditional support.
Yet that’s what President Trump did on Monday in not just welcoming but celebrating one of the most authoritarian leaders in the Middle East, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt, a man responsible for killing hundreds of Egyptians, jailing thousands of others and, in the process, running his country and its reputation into the ground.
The expressions of mutual admiration that permeated the Oval Office were borderline unctuous. Mr. Trump praised Mr. Sisi for doing a “fantastic job” and assured him he has a “great friend and ally in the United States and in me.” In return, Mr. Sisi, who had been barred from the White House during the Obama administration, and who craved the respect such a visit would afford, expressed his “deep appreciation and admiration” for Mr. Trump’s “unique personality.”
Mr. Trump acknowledged that the two countries “have a few things” they don’t agree on, but he pointedly did not mention the abysmal human rights record of Mr. Sisi’s government, which the State Department and human rights groups have accused of gross abuses, including torture and unlawful killings.
Nor, apparently, did Mr. Trump raise the case of Aya Hijazi, an American citizen who works with street children. She was arrested in May 2014 on specious human trafficking charges and imprisoned for 33 months in violation of Egyptian law. Her case has been a cause célèbre among human rights groups, though she is but one of 40,000 people who have been detained, most for purely political reasons.
Egypt is one of America’s closest allies in the Middle East and receives some $1.3 billion in annual military aid, but years of tumult have strained relations. President Hosni Mubarak was overthrown in 2011, and after a brief period of democratic rule that brought the Muslim Brotherhood to power, a military coup in 2013 engineered by Mr. Sisi overthrew the Brotherhood and led to more repression.
Mr. Sisi first cracked down on the Islamists, including a 2013 massacre that killed more than 800 people, then turned his sights on secular opponents and nongovernmental groups. The United States suspended delivery of a modest amount of military aid and asked for improvements in human rights and democracy, which never happened.
Mr. Trump has now made it transparently clear that human rights and democracy are not his big concerns and that he places more value on Egypt as a partner in the fight against the Islamic State. What he does not grasp is that, while Egypt is an important country, it cannot be a force for regional stability nor the partner Mr. Trump imagines on counterterrorism or anything else if Mr. Sisi does not radically change his ways. Mr. Sisi’s repression against enemies real and imagined, his management of the economy and inability to train, educate and create jobs for his nation’s youth can only fuel more anger and unrest.
Mr. Sisi’s task is to undertake economic and political reforms that benefit all Egyptians, not just the military. The White House spectacle might have been worth it if Mr. Trump had tried to make these points to his guest.


This Poll Has Good News for Senate Democrats

Despite having the worst poll numbers of any new president, Donald Trump seems to be holding his own -- barely -- among core supporters. But a new survey showing that Democratic senators in Trump-supporting states are doing better than the president augurs well for their re-election next year.
The poll, conducted by Garin-Hart-Yang Research Group for the Senate Majority Political Action Committee, which supports Democratic Senate candidates, surveyed voters in the 10 states that Trump carried last year where Democratic incumbents face re-election in 2018.
In those states, which Trump won by an average of 14 percentage points, a generic Democrat runs 10 points ahead of a Republican, according to the pollster, Geoff Garin. On the so-called "feeling thermometer" measuring general favorability, Democrats also run almost 10 points ahead of Trump in these states.
"My takeaway from polling in these states now is that even in places where Trump did well, voters want to hedge their bets," Garin said. "This is a pretty good political environment even in deep red states."
Of the 33 Senate seats to be contested in 2018, 25 are held by Democrats. That means they have to do very well just to retain their 48-seat minority.
There are several caveats to the reliable Garin survey. For one thing, it measures only a collective average of voters in states with very different electoral landscapes -- the solidly Republican venues of West Virginia, North Dakota, Montana, Missouri and Indiana as well as the battlegrounds of Florida, Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. And of course much can change in the 19 months remaining until next November's elections.
Nevertheless, it's an early sign that Democrats are ahead in these states and that Trump doesn't have much political clout. Moreover, voters seem inclined to favor candidates likely to check the president's power. When the survey offered a choice between a position of support for the president, such as favoring Democratic compromise, versus more adversarial postures, respondents chose the latter by a big margin. Even in the five deep red states this is true by a 52-to-34 percent margin.
Still, the vote scheduled for later this week on Trump's Supreme Court nominee, Judge Neil Gorsuch, illustrates that some red-state Democrats may be feeling squeezed. Senators Jon Tester of Montana and Claire McCaskill of Missouri oppose the nomination. Conservatives in their states have pounced, charging Tester with caving in to "liberal interest groups" and McCaskill to "Democratic bosses."
Senators Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Joe Manchin of West Virginia are supporting Gorsuch, and left-wing groups are calling for their heads, demanding that the party back challenges from like-minded progressives.
That won't happen. House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi has warned that there will be no general-election support for any insurgent who defeats a Democratic incumbent in a primary. But there may be diminished support from the Democrats' energized grass-roots base.


The New Party of 'No'

Ah, the joys of doing nothing. Republicans must remember them fondly, as they struggle with the difficulties of actually designing real-world bills that have to get past the Senate, and y’know, not hideously offend large numbers of voters.
Democrats, meanwhile, are discovering the sweet, toddler-like joys of just saying “no” to everything. Help Republicans repeal Obamacare? Heck no. Quietly stand by while Republicans approve an eminently qualified nominee to the Supreme Court? No, no, no!
After years of failing at the grown-up business of passing legislation, small wonder the Democrats would like to let the Republicans have a try at being the adults in the room. In politics, saying "no" is a great deal of fun.
Besides, that’s where the electorate seems to be right now. Right after the election, when I was on vacation in Asia, I predicted on Facebook that we’d see Democrats investing in increasingly counterproductive obstructionism, simply because that was what the base was going to want:
Liberals have been very fond of arguing that [conservative] elites somehow encouraged the growth of these destabilizing influences by not shutting down ... well, name your candidate: right-wing talk radio, the tea party, obstructionist forces in Congress, Donald Trump. Liberals are about to find out what those Republicans have long known: they had no power to shut them down. All the tools they might have used had been taken away decades ago, mostly by progressives.
For exactly the same structural forces are at work on the left. Things fall apart; the center cannot hold. Those forces have been masked by Democratic possession of the presidency, which is a unifying force far out of proportion to its actual usefulness. As long as your party holds the White House, you feel like you have a shot at getting things done, and you are willing to cut a great deal of slack to your leadership. Prepare to see Republicans get a lot quieter and more cooperative, and the obstreperous forces on the left to get angrier and more intransigent.
So far this prediction has pretty much been borne out. The base wants a filibuster of Neil Gorsuch's nomination to the Supreme Court, even though there is literally no possible tangible end that can be achieved thereby -- and even though it may indeed make it harder to block Trump nominees in the future. For instance some future truly awful Supreme Court nominee, one for whom Republicans wouldn’t be willing to rewrite Senate rules in order to overcome a filibuster threat.
At the moment, of course, the empty gesture of blocking Gorsuch is delighting many on the left, who finally feel like their party has grown a spine. If this follows the pattern that evolved on the right, however, that feeling will turn out to be increasingly costly. With the Tea Party, Republican moderates initially imagined that they had found something like the crazy partner in a cop buddy film -- the one who could be used to threaten suspects into acting against their own self-interest by saying: “Look, he’s crazy. He could do anything, and I just don’t know how long I can hold him back!”
But then the mainstream lawmakers discovered that their partner's craziness wasn’t an act. The Tea Party helped them secure some victories, yes. But then Crazy Mac cost them control of the Senate, engaged in grandstanding ploys with no obvious payoff, and took the focus off of Obamacare at its moment of greatest vulnerability. They had no control over their crazy “partner,” and that partner cost them more potential victories than it delivered.
Democrats may end up experiencing the same thing. Democrats desperately need to become competitive again outside of a handful of urban agglomerations, not just because their rural failures cost them the presidency, but also because of all the other offices they’ve lost at every level of government below the White House. But making themselves more competitive is probably going to require backing away from an immigration position that was skirting dangerously close to “open borders,” and placing less focus on identity politics. If they try to do this, their base will (correctly) perceive themselves losing power and status in the party, and they will be incandescent. Their first priority will be extracting signals of loyalty to themselves, not winning elections … and if the Republican experience is any guide, they may well get what they want.


China's Success Explains Authoritarianism's Allure

Silicon Valley entrepreneur Peter Thiel is famous for asking interviewees to describe a view they hold that other smart people they know do not agree with. A variant is to ask which views one might earnestly believe in spite of not having much hard evidence for them. And there I have a nomination: I believe that much of Western politics is becoming more authoritarian and less liberal because of the greater presence of autocracies on the world stage, most of all because of the success of China.
If I look back at the 20th century, I am struck by the pull exerted by powerful governing ideologies, even when those systems were evil or failing. Thousands of intellectuals endorsed Stalinism, even after many of its worst practices came to light. Marxism in its broader forms had more adherents yet. Extreme right-wing ideologies exercised a strong pull as well, at least until they became America’s outright enemies as the Second World War approached. Mussolini’s fascism was quite popular with many Americans, including New Deal intellectuals and leaders.
You can scold the sympathizers for their naivete or illiberal tendencies, but there is a deeper truth. Individuals have a mimetic desire to copy or praise or affiliate what is perceived as successful, and a lot of our metrics of success have to do with power rather than freedom or prosperity. So if there is a powerful system on the world stage, many of us will be drawn to it and seek to emulate it, without always being conscious of the reasons for those attractions.
This process is actually not so different from how neoliberalism attracted greater support during the 1990s, when it was perceived as the major victor on the world stage. We neoliberals liked to think that the rest of the world “finally saw the light,” but a more sober retrospective assessment is that much of the popularity boom of neoliberalism was temporary, to be wiped out by status-lowering developments, including the financial crisis and slower real wage growth.
These chains of ideological influence can be remarkably indirect. For instance, it is commonly believed that the collapse of Soviet communism led to a softening of positions within the Irish Republican Army. It’s not that anyone ever expected the Soviets to intervene in the Irish conflict, but rather a role model of resistance had been taken away, and this ultimately made the peace process easier.
As for today, emerging economies have been growing at faster rates than the West and Japan, and overall those playing catch-up are less democratic and less liberal. That has shifted the world’s balance of ideological weight, even though Westerners typically think of themselves as the agenda-setters. But if we Westerners are losing relative economic and political influence, self-doubt may set in or intensify, even if we’re not exactly sure why.
It’s not just about the emerging economies in general, but rather one such economy in particular: China. By purchasing power parity measures China is now the No. 1 economy, and the world’s leading exporter, in addition to its longstanding role as the world’s most populous country. It has had an almost unbroken string of high-growth years since 1979, often at double-digit rates, and it avoided much of the negative fallout from the financial crisis. Its geopolitical influence and its military have been gaining on the U.S. or Europe for decades.
If several generations of Westerners were intrigued by communism, Marxism, Stalinism and even Maoism, is it so implausible to think they might feel some kind of magnetic attraction to the less liberal systems that are flourishing today?
Of course, outright ideological admiration for the Chinese system is pretty hard to come by in the U.S., unlike the kinds of affection formerly expressed for Soviet communism. Nonetheless general praise for the Chinese miracle is pretty common. And the successes of foreign authoritarianism may be an underappreciated factor inducing the U.S., the U.K., Turkey, Hungary and Poland to come up with their own home brews of the ideas. It might be that the current incarnation of the Chinese Communist Party is too nationalistic, and too atheoretical, to inspire much direct loyalty. Nonetheless the economic successes of China and some other countries may have helped create an underlying crisis of confidence in liberal ideas and values. In Africa, for instance, Ethiopia and Rwanda have been improving living standards fairly rapidly, but they too have moved toward authoritarianism systems.
Do I believe all this? Yes. Is there circumstantial evidence that it might be true? Absolutely. Is there a rigorous or testable case? Not really, but I say we underestimate the pull of mimetic desire, the human subconscious and our preoccupation with relative status at our peril.


Parliamentary Democracies Are Just Better at Resisting Populism

Recent and upcoming political upheavals in a number of countries provide some evidence that the institutional design of democracies can be critically important. A clear advantage is emerging for countries that don't directly elect a president: They are more likely to resist the wave of populism sweeping the West.
Where there are no direct presidential elections, populists must win many individual elections over many cycles in order to rise to a nation’s chief executive; Donald Trump seized the White House in his first run for public office. It took less than 17 months.
In the Netherlands, where a populist threat fizzled in this month's legislative election, the perennial need for parties to form coalitions made it unlikely that Geert Wilders would have governed, even had he achieved a plurality of votes. He formed his Party for Freedom 11 years ago.
There was also no populist revolution in Spain during last year’s elections, and none seems likely in Germany -- both countries without a directly elected chief executive. Even in the U.K., the Brexit surprise wouldn't have been possible had David Cameron refused to support the referendum: The 2015 election, which Cameron won, brought a pro-European majority to parliament. The basic U.K. system, also without a single directly elected leader, is inherently as stable and reliable as the other parliamentary democracies.
France's presidential election in April and May gives nationalist populist Marine Le Pen far more visibility, and a clearer path to power, than legislative elections provide for her party, the National Front. Despite being at a disadvantage in the polls, she can still win under certain turnout-related scenarios. In that case, her potential for disruption will be much greater than if her party won the same proportion of votes as she's going to get in the first round of voting. Though, contrary to the widespread perception of the strength of the French presidency, Le Pen would have plenty of opportunity for mischief. The president can, for example, call a referendum -- something Le Pen might well do on Euro Zone and European Union membership.
When a country's constitution provides for the direct election of a president, even with largely ceremonial powers, a strong leader with a lot of political weight can quickly turn things around and make the office more powerful, and more dangerous, than written laws allow.
On paper, the Austrian president has greater powers than his U.S. counterpart in some areas, like appointing top judges without the parliament's consent. But the political tradition is for the president to take a back seat to the chancellor, usually the leader of the strongest party in parliament. Theoretically, however, a disruptor who wins the presidency can turn that arrangement on its head. That's why many Austrians feared last year that nationalist Norbert Hoffer might ascend to the presidency -- and it took a higher turnout than in the previous two elections to defeat him.
On Sunday, Serbia is electing a president. This used to be a largely ceremonial position, but now, Aleksandar Vucic, the current prime minister, is widely expected to win and try to run the country from the president's office. That is a clear path toward more authoritarianism, and, given Vucic's affinity for Russian President Vladimir Putin, it may bode ill for stability in the Balkans.
Few theoretical studies have touched upon the built-in instability of systems with a popularly elected president at the head compared with those where the legislative election is the most important exercise of democracy. But Stephen Ganghof of the University of Potsdam made some interesting points in a 2015 paper that may explain what's going on:
If the majority decides to delegate great powers to the executive – as modern large-scale democracies invariably do – then it must at any time have the power to dismiss the executive and select a new one.
The problem with a directly elected president is that it's usually hard for the legislature to remove someone with a popular mandate. That mandate, according to Ganghof, interferes with the chain through which voters delegate power to the parties with their different programs. The personalization of politics, and the need ultimately to pick one person for the pinnacle of power, makes for less perfect representation.
Ganghof also points out the problems of a pure parliamentary system: Voters are not privy to the bargaining between the parties, and it's harder to hold politicians accountable when they act in groups. These days, however, these problems appear to be a lesser evil than the danger inherent in personalizing the popular choice. It's no accident that Germany, and the allied powers that guided it after World War II, chose a system in which the president, apart from having relatively few powers, is also elected indirectly. It's a more foolproof system: Germans should know.


The One House Race That Could Predict the Next Election

Tom Price made headlines when he became the secretary of health and human services this year, but now all eyes are on the House seat he left empty.
The special election in Georgia's 6th congressional district on April 18 is a rare case in which one race has repercussions for every national constituency -- whether you're a Trump supporter or a Sanders loyalist.
This election could help pundits to make sense of the disjointed voting patterns in the 2016 election. In many districts, voters were more enthusiastic for downballot Republican candidates than for Donald Trump. He carried the Georgia 6th by just 1.5 points, far shy of the 23-point margin for Mitt Romney in 2012. And yet last November, Tom Price carried the district by 23 points.
Democrats see that divide and think Trump will now drag down all Republican candidates. Republicans hope that Trump is an electoral aberration who will have little impact on other elected candidates from his party.
Of course this is just one election, to fill just one House seat. But its outcome for the Republican Party -- weak support like Trump garnered, or a rout like Price won -- could set a precedent for other districts in the 2018 midterm elections.
If the Republicans lose the district, that may not be a win for all Democrats. The leading Democratic contender is Jon Ossoff, a moderate who is counting on liberal votes and courting conservative support as well.
An Ossoff win would disrupt the ascendant left wing of the Democratic Party. That vocal faction -- led by Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren -- advocates rallying support from the party's labor roots. The Ossoff approach is the opposite, much more Clinton-esque. That approach could turn purple districts blue.
Georgia's 6th congressional district is neither rural nor poorly educated. In fact, it's the most well-educated district in the country held by Republicans. A whopping 59.5 percent of residents over the age of 25 have a bachelor's degree. This is higher than in Nancy Pelosi's San Francisco district (56.6 percent) or in any congressional district in well-educated Massachusetts.
An Ossoff win would validate the strategy laid out by Nate Cohn of the New York Times and myself to focus on well-educated Sun Belt suburban districts that historically have leaned Republican. Those districts don't want to hear Sanders's socialist appeals. Ossoff's campaign ads have included messages about cutting wasteful spending and fixing Obamacare, and he has skipped the more emotional and divisive progressive talking points.
The most likely outcome for now is that Ossoff places in the top two in the April 18 special election, and then loses to a Republican challenger in a June 20 runoff election. But should Ossoff beat the odds, then both parties will know that their futures lie not in the Rust Belt, but in affluent suburbs.


The Dumpster Fire Hasn't Been Put Out Quite Yet

The dumpster fire, the American Dialect Society’s Word of the Year for 2016 (even though it is, of course, two words), is still with us. There was an actual dumpster fire in Medford, Oregon, on Tuesday, and another one in Salem, Massachusetts, last week.
And, yes, there are still metaphorical dumpster fires, too. There was this headline -- “Paul Ryan Failed Because His Bill Was a Dumpster Fire” -- at Politico that I stumbled across over the weekend. Which led to a couple of thoughts:
Wow. People are still using that phrase?
What does it say about our time that this has become an acceptable synonym for what the author of the Politico piece called “a failure of policy and legislative strategy”?
First, a little background for readers outside North America: A dumpster is what English speakers on other continents call a skip -- a large garbage container that can be loaded on the back of a truck. There are lots of actual skip fires, but no metaphorical ones that I could find.
The dumpster fire, meanwhile, seems to have made the leap from purely literal in the early 2000s. One early use found by Oxford Dictionaries' Jeff Sherwood was a 2003 movie review by the Arizona Republic's Bill Muller that referred to that year's remake of "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" as "the cinematic equivalent of a dumpster fire -- stinky but insignificant.”
Claire Fallon, whose June 2016 Huffington Post story on the dumpster fire phenomenon stands as the definitive history to date, locates the term's rise in the early part of this decade in the world of sports commentary. It then broke into the mainstream with the presidential candidacy of Donald Trump, a chaotic affair revolving around a man whose views many Americans -- especially media types -- dismissed as garbage.
The definition that Oxford Dictionaries has chosen for dumpster fire is "a chaotic or disastrously mishandled situation," but this misses the aspect of smug dismissal. Dumpster fires generally don't spread or cause that much harm. A dumpster fire is a contained, unthreatening, almost amusing conflagration.
So you might figure that after Trump actually won the presidency, use of the term would fade. Indeed, the chart above makes clear that it has faded. Not all that much yet, though -- thanks in part, as the Politico article that got me going on this shows, to the ongoing struggles of Trump and the Republican Congress.
Still, it's hard to see how this can last. Either Trump pulls his act together, in which case the term won't apply, or things keep going downhill for him -- in which case the fire may spread to an extent that will be hard to depict as limited or amusing. Yes, my frame of mind has been overly affected by regular recent listening to Mike Duncan's brilliant podcast series on the French Revolution, that years-long drama of spiraling chaos and terror that nobody ever refers to as a feu de poubelle. Things probably won't end in disaster like that. But it wouldn't just be a dumpster fire, either.
Another question is whether, whatever happens in politics, the term "dumpster fire" will soon come to be seen (if it isn't already) as lame and out of date. The record of past American Dialect Society Words of the Year is mixed. We still use "app" (2010), "tweet" (2009) and "bailout" (2008) without irony. But "chad" (2000), "e-" (1998) and even "truthiness" (2005) all feel pretty dated. Then there's 2006 Word of the Year "Plutoed," which means demoted or devalued. Really!?! Does anybody ever use that word? Did anybody? What a dumpster fire of a choice.


Jared Kushner Versus the Bureaucracy

It’s been a preoccupation of rulers since Hammurabi: How do you make the bureaucrats behave? For at least three decades, the prevailing answer of governments the world over has been to try to bring some corporate know-how and efficiency to bear on bloated public services. President Donald Trump is about to learn just why that’s so hard.
The White House announced this week that Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law and a top adviser, will oversee an initiative called the Office of American Innovation. The idea is to create “a SWAT team of strategic consultants” who can get the government to run more like “a great American company.”
That’s a laudable impulse. It’s also nearly impossible to realize. Almost all governments try this kind of thing, and almost all fail. Trump’s predecessors dating back at least to Harry Truman have placed their own imprint on the idea -- empowering task forces and technocrats, czars and commissars -- without notable success in taming the federal bureaucracy. Kushner would be wise to consider why, and to temper his expectations accordingly.
One problem is that great American companies aren’t great simply by virtue of their management. They’re also subject to the discipline of free markets. Replicating that discipline administratively -- through benchmarks, check lists, efficiency metrics -- is an imperfect science, often easily gamed. As Max Weber, the great scholar of bureaucracies, put it: “Errors in official statistics do not have direct economic consequences for the responsible official, but miscalculations in a capitalist enterprise are paid for by losses, perhaps by its existence.”
A further difficulty is cultural. Where companies reward risk-taking and creativity, administrators must act soberly and predictably. Public employees aren’t easily fired (or hired). Their interest is in gathering more powers to themselves, not in streamlining. And shaking things up can be counterproductive when the best and brightest have other options: The U.S. government’s chronic inability to lure competent technology workers is a case in point.
Overcoming inefficiency is also harder than would-be reformers typically imagine. It often requires expert knowledge of arcane subject areas, and a commitment spanning years. In many cases, inefficiency is mandated by law or regulation. Authorities overlap. Incentives conflict. Congress has its own purposes. For such disputes, a SWAT team really isn’t really the thing.
Given all this, Kushner shouldn’t be expected to accomplish all that much in his new role. His ambition to modernize government technology is sound. More transparency and efficiency would be welcome. In some cases (education, say), harnessing the power of competition could help. In others (the TSA comes to mind), privatizing services may make sense. But no one should expect a federal government suddenly humming with new productivity.
“The bureaucracy,” Karl Marx wrote, “is a circle from which no one can escape.” That goes for presidents as much as for the public -- probably more so.


Trump's Health-Care Failure and the End of Fake News

The Republicans' failed attempt to enact the American Health Care Act had at least one result: fake news suffered a very real loss.
One common fear after President Donald Trump's inauguration was that the agenda of the following four years would be driven by fake news -- an administration of "alternative facts." In his first press conference, White House press secretary Sean Spicer doubled down on President Trump's inaccurate claim that the crowd for his inauguration was the largest in history. The president has also repeated his unsubstantiated (and roundly debunked) claim that, were it not for millions of fraudulent votes, he would have won the popular vote in the election.
That kind of talk works, as far as it goes. It gets attention. It stokes emotion. It distracts from the administration's substantive failures. But that kind of talk doesn't get any work done. When it came time to generate an actual bill, which could pass both chambers of Congress and hold up to judicial review … well, that's when bluster sputters out and the gears of lawmaking grind into action.
Since the first introduction of the text of the American Health Care Act this month, the debate over it was strikingly traditional. If there was one central issue, it wasn't an internet hoax like a specious claim about the president's country of birth, but rather a score from the Congressional Budget Office -- a bona fide arbiter of real information. While there were some early suggestions that CBO scores can be inaccurate, in the end, the office's projection (that the Republican plan would cost 24 million people their insurance) carried more and more weight.
Key constituencies figured out the impact that the bill would have on their members. The House Freedom Caucus correctly noted that the AHCA would leave much of the core of Obamacare intact, violating their campaign pledges to fully repeal it. Moderate Republicans in the House noted that the bill would hurt so many voters, and some Republican senators pointed out the impact the bill would have on some of their lower-income, older constituents. In the hours leading up to the bill being pulled on Friday afternoon, Trump ally and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, in an effort to get on the right side of the effort, accurately tweeted the low 17 percent support for the AHCA as found in a Quinnipiac poll.
The president's media outreach immediately after the House pulled the bill was noteworthy as well. His first two calls were not to propagandists or even Trump-friendly sources, but rather to the very-real-news Washington Post and New York Times. The press conferences held that afternoon by House Speaker Paul Ryan and Trump were straightforward acknowledgements of failure with no attempts to sugarcoat what had happened.
There's a lesson here as attention now shifts to tax reform. Fake news may have been effective over the past seven years as Republicans fired up their base and blocked President Barack Obama's agenda. But with Republicans in control of all branches of government, they have to govern instead of critique. The most generous assessment is that their agenda is falling flat.
Some voters bought into Republicans' false criticism of Obamacare, but apparently very few bought into Trump's false praise of the alternative. When lawmakers try to take away their health insurance, voters notice.
Tax reform, like health care, inherently involves trade-offs that create winners and losers. A border adjustment tax would hurt importers and retailers like Wal-Mart. Those businesses won't be swayed by false claims, and voters will notice when prices rise and wages fall. Voters like the abstract promise to eliminate loopholes that favor special interests, but when the possibility becomes concrete, voters realize that they will be footing the bill. When it's time to legislate, details matter -- and details trump fake news.
The post-inauguration fears now seem to have been a bit off. Trump's false claims signified not the beginning of a fake news era, but the end of one.


What Trump and Ryan Can Learn From Mandela

In stating on Friday that Republicans are “going through the inevitable growing pains of being an opposition party to becoming a governing party," House Speaker Paul Ryan was identifying a phenomenon that has challenged many new governments around the world -- and tripped up quite a few.
It constitutes a test for President Donald Trump, along with members of his team who have no prior public-sector experience, and the elites who lead Republican lawmakers in Congress and at the state level. Their success making the adjustment from politics to administration will have important economic, financial, institutional, political and social implications.
To those of us who have been interested in political transitions around the globe, what is taking place in the U.S. can be reminiscent of a more general phenomenon that has repeatedly played out in the developing world. In particular, it's one that has hit hard in countries seeking to pivot away from colonial rule – especially those where freedom fighters, invigorated by their triumph over the evil of deeply embedded discrimination, struggled and failed to deliver on their promise of social justice and more inclusive growth.
South Africa’s Nelson Mandela is, in my opinion, the best modern example of a leader who understood the hardest complexities of the transition from opposition to governing. In leading his country away from many years of repressive apartheid rule, one of his first challenges was to equip his new government with the ability to govern effectively, secure early wins and sell to his citizens a vision that helped protect against unanticipated internal and external shocks.
From day one, Mandela looked past the senior set of likely government appointments and quickly developed and trained a new cadre of junior technocrats. He resisted the temptation to dismantle laws and institutions until credible alternatives had been designed and discussed. He set up a “truth and reconciliation” process that provided a basis for assessing the damage incurred during long decades of repressive minority rule, and thereby contained harmful blame games. And, in one of the most remarkable examples of leadership and vision, he urged South Africans to live under the mantra of “forgiving but not forgetting.” (In today’s verbiage, he understood the need to work with the establishment even when the stated objective was to dismantle it.)
In doing all this, Mandela secured an important mix of coalitions among new and old that enabled his country to undertake an historical pivot without the violence and disruptions that crippled many other post-colonial transitions. He developed public-private partnerships to supplement meager government resources and to counter the flight of capital and talent out of the country. And he worked hard – though, as subsequent developments (including today’s crippling corruption and the incomplete corporate embrace of diversity) would prove, far from perfectly – on succession planning to ensure that the initial gains would serve as foundation for more important ones down the road.
As they draw lessons from their defeat, Trump and Ryan would be well advised to take note of some of the lessons from Mandela’s remarkable government experience – and this notwithstanding the very different circumstances of the U.S. For example:
Reconciliation, rather than finger pointing, needs to guide crisis management and communication.
The effort cannot be limited to just engaging the anti-establishment wing of the Republican Party that went rogue on the health-care bill.
Success will require making room for elements of the Democratic Party.
Better preparation, sequencing, communication and buy-in will be key to ensuring that other elements of the Republican legislative agenda, including tax reform, do not suffer a similar fate.
Ironically, the Trump administration doesn’t have as much time as one would think, given that it has only been in office for two months. It needs to move quickly to extend the federal debt ceiling lest normal government operations be disrupted. Significant progress on tax reform, infrastructure and the budget needs to be secured before lawmakers’ attention turns to the mid-term elections of 2018. It must be careful not to spook financial markets that, having given it the benefit of the doubt, have decoupled prices from fundamentals. And it must convince the rest of the world, including worried allies and mischievous others, that its international efforts will not fall victim to the quick return of domestic political dysfunction.


Bannon's Requiem for the Administrative State

Is the demise of a rushed, poorly crafted, ill-considered, wrong-headed and politically toxic health-care bill good or bad for the "administrative state"?
I only ask because White House strategist Stephen Bannon proclaimed at a conference of conservatives in February that the "deconstruction of the administrative state" is his goal.
It's unclear so far what Bannon's phrase "administrative state" means, or what "deconstructing" it would entail. Deregulation is surely a key element of it. But Obamacare seems about as clear an exponent of the administrative state as you can get. It's a vast and highly complex regulatory regime that administers intrusive and often restrictive rules while transferring payments and benefits from some Americans to others via federal and state governments.
In effect, Obamacare is the leading edge of what National Review writer David French called a "vast and bloated executive branch -- existing through its alphabet soup of agencies such as the EPA, IRS, DOE, ATF, and the like."
The "administrative state," in other words, is all the structures and functions of government that conservatives dislike, an alien force that, as French said, "intrudes into virtually every aspect of American life."
The paradox, of course, is that such intrusions also keep quite a few Trump voters, among others, healthy and alive.
In the crowded Republican primary field of 2016, Trump alone promised to protect Social Security and Medicare while delivering "terrific" health insurance to everybody. Trump explicitly said he would deal with people who can't afford health insurance not as his libertarian-minded Republican rivals would, but more like a social democrat.
"We're going to help them out," he told Greta Van Susteren last April, smacking his hand into an open palm for emphasis. And by "we," Trump made clear, he meant "government."
Bannon is often portrayed -- not infrequently by himself -- as the guardian of the (white) working class that rallied to Trump's promise of a powerful state dedicated to their interests.
The tension between that promise to Trump voters and Bannon's call for deconstruction seems akin to Trump's promise to repeal Obamacare while somehow leaving everyone who benefits from it better off. Either the deconstruction pledge is a vestigial tail of the pre-Trump Republican Party, or the Trumpian paternalism is a virus that the libertarian GOP host has yet to reckon with.
Bannonism, which seems like little more than Trumpism with a library card, requires its share of administrative detail. The deconstructed state still needs to find the ways and means to issue Social Security checks and transfer Medicare funds and carry out trade and tax regulations.
It seems unlikely that Trump intends to seize the functions of the federal entitlement complex and hand them over to the local bodega. Meanwhile he wants a large increase at the Pentagon (a hierarchical state bureaucracy) and a vast increase in immigration policing powers, including thousands of new agents for government bureaucracies such as the Border Patrol and Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
Which raises the question of whether "deconstruction of the administrative state" means anything beyond deregulation.
As David Brooks wrote in the New York Times:
Bannon had the opportunity to realign American politics around the social, cultural and economic concerns of the working class. Erect barriers to keep out aliens from abroad, and shift money from the rich to the working class to create economic security at home.
Instead, the Trump administration so far is just the sum of its principal's policy ignorance and used-car salesmanship and the Republican Party's unresolved contradictions. The character of the health-care "repeal and replace" legislation that collapsed last week was reflective of the whole incoherent mess. For conservative purists, the bill was another march on the Road to Serfdom. For working-class voters, it was a comprehensive hosing.
Much of what the administrative state actually administers is American society's shifting search for social equity. It supervises environmental regulations to protect people and beasts from powerful industries. It regulates the insurance industry to give millions of people access to health care. It makes cars and roads safer, and makes it harder for unscrupulous businessmen to rip off poor college students or contractors without consequences.
The appetite to eliminate such protections is a decidedly peculiar and partisan one. The likelihood of rolling back all that without significant opposition or scandal does not seem great. The administrative state surely won't win all the coming battles with Republican Washington. But the resilience of Obamacare suggests it still has plenty of fight in it.


Trump's Frustrations Were Built Into the Job

Constitutional checks and balances are doing their job, making sure Donald Trump doesn’t rule on his own. First, it was the courts blocking the president’s executive order on immigration -- twice. Now, remarkably enough, it’s Congress, which has refused to repeal the Affordable Care Act and change Obamacare into Trumpcare. Last week’s developments on Capitol Hill may seem more surprising, because a Congress of the same party is typically a weaker check on a president than an opposition-dominated one. But the constitutional design of separation of powers is supposed to work regardless of parties -- and in historical terms, it often has.
It’s important to distinguish between a dictatorship, where the president rules by fiat; a parliamentary system, where the prime minister governs through the majority party; and a presidential democracy, where the president must execute the laws passed by the separately elected legislature.
The differences may seem obvious, but I’ve spoken to many worried Democrats over the past few months who fear and loathe being “ruled” by Trump. My answer is always the same: Trump’s not ruling you, because the U.S. isn’t a dictatorship. And now, after his health-care-repeal debacle, I can add: He’s barely even governing.
The separation of powers is working, at least so far, because the each branch of government has different incentives and values. James Madison put it bluntly in Federalist No. 51, and his language still resonates: “Ambition must be made to counteract ambition. The interest of the man must be connected with the constitutional rights of the place.”
To be sure, interest and ambition work differently in the judiciary than they do in the political branches. The judges who have blocked Trump’s executive order on immigration aren’t in line for promotion, and they can’t be fired. The public doesn’t know much about them, even though they’ve issued historically significant decisions. Ask yourself: How many of those judges can you name? Indeed, a poll recently revealed that 57 percent of Americans can’t name even a single Supreme Court justice, and they’re enormously more visible than district and appellate judges.
What motivates almost all judges is, frankly, to do justice and follow the law. Their interest and ambition is to gain the respect of their peers and the legal community.
What’s more, judges and lawyers alike feel solidarity within the profession, and want to protect it against incursions from the president. That’s why I’m confident that Judge Neil Gorsuch, Trump’s nominee for the Supreme Court, really is “disheartened” by Trump’s attacks on the judiciary, as Gorsuch said during his confirmation hearing last week.
It’s also why I’m sure Gorsuch meant it when he said no one is above the law, including the president.
Congress’s interest and ambition is a lot more blatant. That’s really what Madison was addressing -- and it’s what saved the ACA.
Party loyalty can, of course, weaken congressional interest in championing the rights of Congress over the president’s interest. Madison wanted to minimize political parties when he was designing the Constitution, and neither he nor Alexander Hamilton addressed parties at any length in the Federalist Papers.
But as recent events show, even party loyalty doesn’t eliminate individual Congress members’ interests and ambitions.
Moderate Republicans feared paying a price in their districts for repealing the ACA if its replacement harmed constituents. Their interest was to get re-elected, and that outweighed party loyalty.
More fascinating, the right-wing Freedom Caucus members, who tend to be from safely Republican districts, placed their own ambition not to compromise on their Obamacare hatred over party interest -- and over the president’s.
The Freedom Caucus members seem confident that voters in their constituencies won’t punish them for their hardline stance. They can’t be challenged in a primary from the right, not after this shenanigan. And in the past, their rejectionist tactics have gotten them re-elected.
As for their long-term interests, the Freedom Caucus presumably sees this vote as a major victory. They’ve blocked the president and the rest of the Republican Party. That means, in theory, Trump and the party will have to turn right to get any serious legislation passed.
A rightward turn, of course, even if Trump were prepared to make it, risks alienating more moderate Republicans in Congress -- and their voters.
Behold the separation of powers at its finest. Trump, a former Democrat, becomes a Republican and gets elected. Then his own party in Congress blocks him from accomplishing what the party has for years been treating as its signature policy. His interest and ambition are blocked by interest and ambition in Congress.
These checks and balances aren’t cost-free. They make it hard to get anything done in government.
When I’m talking to people who are engaged in designing a constitution, as in Tunisia a couple of years ago, I tell them that you can array all constitutions on a continuum, from the most powerful government to the most hard-to-get-things-done. Separation of powers lies pretty far toward to the gridlock end.
When your party has the presidency and Congress, the checks and balances are frustrating. But when you’re in opposition, the checks and balances are a gift from the gods -- or at least from the Framers.


Trump Can't Govern Because He Can't Build Trust

President Donald Trump, or associates claiming to reflect his views, have fingered a range of villains to blame for the legislative collapse last week of the Republican health-care plan. These include conservative think tanks, Democrats, House Speaker Paul Ryan, the "Freedom Caucus" of right-wing congressmen, his son-in-law, his chief of staff Reince Priebus and the deeply flawed bill to replace Obamacare.
Naturally it didn't occur to the chief executive that the chief culprit was himself. He failed at public persuasion -- only 17 percent of voters supported the measure -- and private pressure, with idle threats to campaign against opponents. Then he lied, falsely claiming that he never said he'd repeal and replace Obamacare quickly, and distancing himself from the bill that only days earlier he had enthusiastically embraced.
Trump is a stranger to truth, civility and personal responsibility. That has been evident to Trump watchers for decades, and will be the central characteristic of the rest of his presidency.
To congressional conservatives, Republican leaders, African American politicians, global allies or adversaries, and the public, his word is transactional. Trust is just another thing to negotiate. But governing doesn't work that way.
"A president has to establish an atmosphere of trust; trust is the coin of the realm," former Secretary of State George Shultz said on "Face the Nation" on CBS on Sunday. "It's important for a president to get off to a start where people see he says what he means, he means what he says and he can carry out what he starts out to carry out."
Trump can talk about changing priorities, switching strategies and crafting new coalitions, but his disdain for truth won't change.
Other presidents have misrepresented facts, even on occasion lied. But this one is different, not only in degree but in kind. The hope of some Republicans was that the man who spread the nutty, racist charge that President Barack Obama wasn't born in the U.S. would change once he arrived at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. He hasn't.
This is compounded by what emerged in the health-care fiasco: his lack of interest in substance. It was clear to some members who met with him that he had little sense of what was in the bill that Paul Ryan crafted.
A few weeks ago, the president exclaimed, "Nobody knew health care could be so complicated!" That wasn't exactly news to anyone who has thought about the subject in recent decades, and in the days leading up to the collapse he kept asking his staff if the Republican replacement really was good legislation. Maybe he could have taken a little time to discover that it wasn't. That's why a consensus built swiftly against it, comprising most conservative and liberal policy experts, hospitals, doctors, many insurers and patients.
He may have a little more knowledge when it comes to the tax system, at least as it affects his own interests. Former Senator Bill Bradley, the architect of the 1986 tax-reform legislation, says Trump never forgave him for ending some tax breaks for real-estate transactions to balance revenue lost to lower rates.
On infrastructure, the White House is now suggesting that Trump may work with Democrats. That could be good public policy, but don't hold your breath waiting for it to happen. Cross-aisle coalition-building requires trust; how many Democrats trust Trump?


Melania Trump Needs Some Public-Relations Help

While the president’s approval ratings hit a new low this month, his wife’s are on the rise. A recent CNN/ORC poll found that 52 percent of Americans like Melania Trump -- an increase of 16 percent since her husband took office.
But it’s unlikely that Melania Trump will be able to stay popular without help. So far, she hasn’t hired a press secretary. That’s really odd. Every first lady since Jackie Kennedy had one by this point in her husband’s administration, according to Kate Andersen Brower, author of “First Women: The Grace and Power of America’s Modern First Ladies.”
As any public-relations professional will tell you, prominent people have two options: to try to shape the narrative about themselves, or to let others do it for them. But Brower says that currently, reporters for major media outlets can’t even get their requests to interview the first lady answered.
“There are so many requests coming into Melania right now and there’s no one there to decide what’s worth doing and what’s worth skipping,” she said. “It just leaves this big hole which people fill with their own interpretations of her. They’re judging whether she’s smiling enough and what she’s wearing. But if she had a press secretary, she could do very coordinated interviews with media outlets to shape her image the way she wants to be seen.”
For example, Brower said former first lady Michelle Obama’s team did a particularly great job of making her relatable to the American people. “The mom dancing on ‘Jimmy Fallon’ was a way to really endear her to the public,” she said. “People want to feel like they could be in the carpool line with the first lady. They want to feel that connection.”
Brower says Melania Trump’s challenge is especially difficult because “her great wealth and really unattainable beauty” make it hard for everyday Americans to relate to her. But a press secretary could help Trump talk about aspects of her life that ordinary citizens understand, like raising her son.
A spokesperson could also help her figure out how to effectively harness the powerful platform she commands. Brower says every first lady since Lady Bird Johnson has used her position to promote social causes. “Lady Bird Johnson said that, as first lady, you can pick up the phone and change someone’s life,” she said.
Americans are unlikely to love a first lady who seems indifferent to the tremendous opportunity she has to do good. Melania Trump, who hasn’t moved to the White House yet because her son is finishing school in New York, has been largely invisible since her husband took office. She did, however, read to kids in a hospital and host a White House lunch about women’s empowerment in honor of International Women’s Day this month.
A good press secretary would help Trump research and think through the issues she chooses to champion -- and be sure she follows through. In particular, it’s important to consider how promoting particular causes could invite negative attention. For example, in early November, Trump promised that if her husband were elected, she would use her platform as first lady to combat cyber-bullying. Any good communication professional would have advised her against this.
To start with, her husband is widely considered the cyber-bully-in-chief. For example, after an 18-year-old college student criticized him at a rally, the then-candidate took to Twitter to call her an “arrogant young woman.” The young woman received threats of violent assault for more than a year. Any cyber-bullying initiative the first lady undertakes will only draw attention to this irony.
Second, a professional communicator watching out for her husband’s interests would likely advise against getting involved in the anti-bullying community because, as reporter Stephanie Mencimer explained in Mother Jones, the community is largely run by advocates for LGBT youth. That would alienate conservative evangelicals, an important group of voters for the president, who view such initiatives as a veiled attempt to promote LGBT rights.
Beyond that, Melania Trump seems to not be following through on her pledge. Last month, Mencimer contacted key figures in the anti-cyber-bullying community and found that no one has heard from her or her staff. Perhaps the only thing worse for the first lady’s reputation than viewing her platform insouciantly is making promises and then breaking them.
A professional communicator would also help Trump avoid other mistakes, such as her plagiarism of Michelle Obama in her July speech at the Republican National Convention.
Of course, I’m not applying for the job. As of late last month, there were still nearly 2,000 open positions in her husband’s administration. Part of the problem is that even Republican professional operatives hesitate to be involved in a scandal-plagued and truth-challenged administration.
But an effective East Wing press secretary could be one of the most helpful people to the West Wing. Lauren Wright, author of “On Behalf of the President: Presidential Spouses and White House Communications Strategy Today,” found that first ladies can not only improve their husbands’ images but also help build support for their policy agendas. In fact, sometimes their ability to command attention exceeds that of their husbands themselves.
Melania Trump holds a staggering amount of potential power to improve both her own reputation and the world. Here’s hoping she finds someone to help her wield it.
(Removes erroneous description of previous first ladies’ first-year favorability ratings in first paragraph of column published March 26.)


Trump Economy Needs Wings and Prayers to Soar

Donald Trump boasts that he has been an economic genius, creating jobs, cutting $12 billion off the national debt and overseeing a soaring stock market in just his first two months.
These claims are largely phony. He may need braggadocio, though, because on the economy he has been dealt a bad hand politically. This problem is likely to be compounded by two actions his first year.
Perversely, the reason he inherited a bad hand politically is that he got a good one economically: low unemployment, moderate growth and the glimmerings of wage gains. If history is any guide, the last 77 months of job growth won't last a whole lot longer.
By contrast, most successful presidents dating back to Franklin D. Roosevelt inherited economies in dire straits and got political credit for reviving them. President Ronald Reagan took over amid the sluggish growth and soaring inflation of the "stagflation" period, while President Barack Obama assumed office at the start of the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression. Economic conditions got worse on both occasions, with unemployment hitting double digits, before improving markedly to each incumbent's benefit.
Trump, who promised a booming economy with a 4 percent growth rate, was counting on big tax cuts and huge infrastructure spending to create jobs.
But Republican congressional leaders insisted that the first priority was to repeal and replace Obama's signature health-care system. They failed, revealing schisms in Republican ranks, Speaker Paul Ryan's political ineptitude and Trump's inability to pressure or persuade members of Congress.
It essentially wasted the crucial first three months of Republican rule. Legislation for rebuilding roads, bridges and airports has been put off. Whatever materializes is likely to be less ambitious than Trump's campaign promises -- his proposed budget actually cuts infrastructure spending -- meaning it would have less immediate economic impact.
The priority now is tax reform, with individual and corporate reductions and base-broadening to cover some of the lost revenue. Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin predicted that tax reform will be "a lot simpler" than health care. The naive newcomer soon will learn that there's a reason there hasn't been an important overhaul of the tax system in over 30 years. With the devastating health-care defeat, look for Trump to focus tax cuts more on the middle class than on making top-rate, supply-side reductions. Ryan's preferred "border adjustment tax" favoring exports is dead.
The other complication for the Trump White House will be the Federal Reserve Board. The term of Chair Janet Yellen, a distinguished Democratic economist appointed three years ago by Obama, expires next Feb. 3. If the economy is slowing at that point, the question of who succeeds Yellen becomes more important, since the Fed under Yellen is starting to raise interest rates to keep growth from speeding out of control.
Already there is speculation, even some lobbying, for her successor. The possibilities include a former Fed governor, Kevin Warsh, along with Glenn Hubbard, dean of the Columbia Business School and a leading Republican economist in the George W. Bush administration. There is also talk that Gary Cohn, a top Trump economic adviser and former president of Goldman Sachs, might be a more accommodating choice from Trump's point of view.
To the extent he has any economic ideology, Trump, the builder, loves low interest rates. Ironically, that puts him closer to the views of Yellen than to the Republican inflation hawks who worry about the potential of low rates to overstimulate growth.
But reappointing Obama's Fed chair would drive Republicans crazy. Yellen, whom Trump blasted during the campaign as an Obama toadie, probably has little interest in staying. If there are any economic dislocations, Trump can be counted on to lash out at the Fed more than any president since Richard Nixon. He has little respect for any institutions and always blames others for problems.
As always, timing will be essential. At the time of both Reagan's and Obama's re-election, the jobless rate was almost the same as when they took office. But both benefited from favorable trends. In Reagan's case, unemployment had dropped sharply after soaring for awhile, enabling him to proclaim "morning in America." Job growth after the 2008 recession made a persuasive case four years later for the strength of "the Obama economy." Direction matters, politically.
Trump could be in good shape if, in three and a half years, he has pulled a trifecta. That would mean he's not tainted by Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, his family-business conflicts of interest don't cause an open scandal, and he doesn't get into a war. Oh, and presides over a jobless rate no worse than the 4.8 percent he inherited.


Democrats Have a Gorsuch Problem

Neil Gorsuch will have the support of all 52 Senate Republicans for confirmation to the Supreme Court. He also could win the votes of a half-dozen or so Democrats, and therein lies a problem for that party.
Unlike President Donald Trump's budget or the Republican health-care plan, which are so flawed that it's easy for all Democrats to oppose them, backing Gorsuch may have some political appeal for Democrats from conservative states. That has inflamed left-wing activists, who have threatened to oppose any Senate Democrat who supports Trump's Supreme Court nominee.
That category might include several incumbent senators who face competitive re-election races next year, such as West Virginia's Joe Manchin or North Dakota's Heidi Heitkamp.
They will be painted by Republican opponents next year as obstructionists. To counter that charge, it may be useful to be able to say that they voted for a Republican nominee, whom Democrats can't defeat anyway and who wouldn't change the ideological balance of the Supreme Court. Gorsuch would replace the late conservative Justice Antonin Scalia.
But energized liberal activists, still smarting over the way Republicans blocked President Barack Obama's court nominee, Judge Merrick Garland, are threatening primary challenges next year against Democrats who don't oppose Gorsuch. Michael Moore, the left-wing filmmaker, warned Senate Democrats on Twitter that if they did not "filibuster and block" the Gorsuch nomination, "we will find a true progressive and primary u in next election."
Similar messages are being sent elsewhere: In Seattle, for example, a liberal blog this week called for pressuring Senator Maria Cantwell to oppose Gorsuch in every way.
Abortion-rights advocates and some labor unions that have stopped short of threats have still cast the vote as a loyalty test.
The liberal wing wants party leaders to filibuster the Gorsuch nomination, which would put even more pressure on Democratic senators from conservative states. Much as the leaders would like to avoid what would probably be a futile gambit anyway -- Republicans could eliminate the filibuster if they didn't have 60 votes for confirmation -- urging from the left will make it hard to do.
For the leaders, disheartened after the drubbing they took in November, the outpouring of anti-Trump activism has been encouraging. Many of them consider it a mirror image of the Tea Party uprising eight years ago that energized a Republican comeback.
But they also remember that right-wing activists cost Republicans some Senate seats. In Delaware, for example, the self-described anti-masturbation activist Christine O'Donnell won a 2010 primary upset over a popular mainstream Republican and then lost the general election to Democrat Chris Coons. Republicans thus lost a golden opportunity to take the Senate seat vacated by Vice President Joe Biden. Similar right-wing primary victories hurt Republican prospects in Missouri and Indiana.
Some Democratic leaders, who are counting on retaining their Senate incumbents next year in an anti-Trump electoral wave, hope to be able to deflect anger over a Gorsuch confirmation vote. First, they can argue that it's not a key vote because it would be subsequent High Court nominations that would tilt the balance of the court.
They also want to focus attention on Trumpcare and the administration's proposed budget, both of which are unfriendly to voters in a number of conservative states where Trump did well and Democratic incumbent Senators are up for re-election. It's these issues, more than the Gorsuch vote, that they hope activists will focus on when lawmakers go home during the congressional recess early next month.


If It's Easy to Reach Lawmakers, They'll Ignore You

The problem with political action is that it’s hard. You have to get up early, go to meetings, write your representative, find a stamp for the envelope you don’t have for the letter you want to write your representative.… Shouldn’t technology solve this problem, and make it easier to get the political results we want?
Apparently, someone’s been asking that question. My social media feed has supplied me with word of a new application that aims to make political action as easy as sending a text.
The idea is that you text the word “resist” to a number, and after getting a small amount of information (your name, your ZIP code) it will let you set up a letter to fax to your senator. It’s the sort of thing you can do with any spare moment.
It’s a great idea -- at first. It's so great that I suspect it will soon devalue the fax as political currency.
Allow me to explain. There’s a hierarchy of political actions that you can take to impress your legislators with your commitment to an issue. Sending a letter or calling is high on that hierarchy; social media, email and signing Change.org petitions ranks much lower. The new service effectively acts as a political currency converter, allowing individuals to do something easy (text) while appearing to have done something less easy (fax).
There is a reason that more primitive means of communicating with your legislator tend to make them more interested in what you have to say: Those forms of communication cost more of your time, and therefore indicate a level of commitment that might reflect your intentions to donate and vote (for or against the lawmaker in question).
If this service catches on, legislators will quickly begin to ignore faxes roughly the way they would ignore a text campaign.
But what if this text-to-fax service is just the first step? What if other services create unique physical letters, that appear to come from actual voters? How can legislators get high-quality signals about what their voters want? We're entering a world in which it is easier than ever for voters to say something to their legislators, but harder than ever for lawmakers to hear them.
Face-to-face contact is the one signal people can’t fake. If you show up to talk to your legislator, it’s because you took valuable time out of your day.
The hyperlocal party organizations that used to take care of this sort of thing have largely atrophied, of course, in the era of big data and broadcast campaigns. But they could be rejuvenated. And they may have to be, if the quantity of electronic information devalues all currencies except the handshake.


Don't Believe White House Revisionism on Manafort

Bloomberg journalists were hosting a series of breakfasts with national political reporters at the Republican National Convention last July and wanted an influential guest for the opening morning. With Donald Trump unavailable, the next best choice was clear: his campaign chairman, Paul Manafort.
Manafort had taken over the campaign and was directing it at a critical time, when Trump wrapped up the nomination and headed off fights at the convention between various Republican factions.
He left the campaign in August amid controversy over his role as hired gun for a pro-Russian political party in Ukraine. This week, the Associated Press revealed that Manafort secretly worked for a Russian billionaire to advance the interests of Russian President Vladimir Putin a decade ago, and proposed an ambitious political strategy to undermine Putin's opposition.
Now that the Federal Bureau of Investigation has confirmed that it is investigating whether there was collusion between Trump operatives and Russian interference in the presidential election, Manafort has become almost a non-person in Trumpland.
White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer declared on Monday that Manafort had only a "very limited role for a very limited time" in the Trump campaign.
Like many other assertions that have been made from the White House since Trump was inaugurated on Jan. 20, that was false.
Manafort controlled hiring for the Trump campaign, along with its media campaign and budget.
At that July breakfast in Cleveland, it was clear that Manafort spoke for the candidate and knew his thinking. He had been in charge of all the strategy for the convention.
He explained that he had put Trump in touch with Mike Pence, then governor of Indiana and now vice president. "I brought him in to meet Pence," Manafort said of Trump, adding that the contact led to the notion that the Indiana governor "had value to Trump as a potential VP nominee."
The breakfast guest the next morning was the Republican Party chairman, Reince Priebus. Priebus told me then how important Manafort was to the campaign, what an improvement he was over former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski. Priebus is now White House chief of staff.


Why Cut an Agency That Makes Money?

Caught in the crosswinds of President Donald Trump's aggressive budget-cutting is one program that Democrats and Republicans should both support. The Overseas Private Investment Corporation, the government's development-finance institution, is one of numerous agencies and programs set to be eliminated if Trump's proposed budget is enacted. But OPIC is a rare example of a profitable and lean federal agency -- one that actually reduces the budget deficit.
OPIC mobilizes private capital for emerging markets by providing debt financing, political risk insurance and support for investment funds. This boosts revenue and jobs at home, while encouraging development in poorer and potentially unstable countries. It also helps U.S. businesses mitigate risk by providing capital in areas where conventional financial institutions often are reluctant or unable to lend.
As part of our private-equity program, my investment firm, Olympus Capital Asia, has worked with OPIC for the past 20 years, under Democratic and Republican administrations, and I can testify that it is the opposite of "corporate welfare." In fact, the U.S. taxpayer has made about $20 million just from our business. This revenue comes from the fees we pay OPIC, which allow us to issue low-cost, long-term financing on qualifying investments.
We've worked with OPIC on 18 investments in local industries, including microfinance, consumer goods, and environmental and health-care services. These businesses have benefited emerging economies such as India, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines without replacing American jobs or disadvantaging U.S. companies, consistent with OPIC's strict requirements. With the agency's support, funds like ours have invested more than $5 billion in over 570 privately owned and managed companies in some 65 countries.
All this is done at no net cost to U.S. taxpayers. By charging market-based rates and premiums for its loans and insurance, OPIC has generated a $5.7 billion surplus since it was created in 1971 by President Richard Nixon. Last year, it brought in $263 million in revenue with a budget of only $63 million -- and with fewer than 300 employees.
So why involve the government in commercial activities such as investment, lending and insurance? Simple: Even though OPIC charges market rates and profits on its activities, its very presence in a transaction as a U.S. government-owned corporation helps to reduce risk, because companies in emerging markets know that their own governments will not want high-profile defaults on OPIC-linked projects.
Emerging markets can present unique challenges to businesses, so if an investment runs into trouble, OPIC can help find a solution, with its credibility and influence enhanced by the government's imprimatur. More than once, when we faced stressful circumstances in developing markets, we've benefitted from OPIC's help. The agency's historically low credit losses and insurance claims are testimony to its ability to reduce risk.
Olympus Capital's most recent OPIC investment is in a company that controls fast-growing microfinance businesses in India, Indonesia and the Philippines. Globally, 2 billion people lack access to formal financial services, and most of them live in emerging markets where banks generally don't make loans of less than $500. Micro loans -- primarily for income-producing assets such as livestock -- can help lift these people into the middle class. OPIC has profitably backed such programs throughout emerging markets.
Expanding financial access is a critical component of economic stability and growth, and thus strongly in the interests of U.S. foreign policy and national security. OPIC also requires that clients like us, and the companies we invest in, adhere to high environmental, social, legal and governance standards. For many companies receiving investment from OPIC-affiliated funds, these standards provide a roadmap for the best practices and responsible corporate behavior that the U.S. government has long sought to promote overseas.
I recognize the imperative to cut government waste and overreach. But this administration, packed with successful business leaders, should appreciate a public-private partnership that leverages the business sector to boost overseas development and achieve significant foreign-policy goals -- all while earning high returns for taxpayers.
Americans are divided at home, and the image and influence of their government faces challenges abroad. We have enough real problems without creating new ones for the sake of symbolic budget cuts. OPIC doesn't just benefit taxpayers. It projects core American values to the developing world. And that's something that can't be measured in dollars alone.


When the Government's Policy Is to Pass the Buck

An interesting little tiff has erupted over the Republican health-care bill wending its way through the House. Most of the politicking over this bill has involved pushing and pulling from various national interest groups. But one debate lighting up my home state is an old-fashioned brawl between levels of government. The tiff is all the more interesting because it shows how policy will be made as America struggles with a needy, aging population.
At issue is the unusual way New York State finances Medicaid. When Medicaid was passed in the 1960s, New York thought it sounded like a splendid idea, and wanted to extend the boon of Medicaid to as many people as possible. The law ultimately signed by Governor Nelson Rockefeller set income eligibility at $6,000 per year for a family of four -- just slightly below the U.S. median family income in that era. This would, of course, be quite expensive, so the law also required that local governments pick up roughly half the tab.
Eventually, New York’s generous eligibility requirements were scaled back. But the local financing requirements remained. New York has some of the highest per-capita Medicaid expenditures in the country, and a large share of that burden falls upon its local governments.
That’s a winning formula for New York State legislators, who get to give away lots of money to key interest groups at minimal cost to the state budget. But thanks to New York State’s somewhat odd geography, it is catastrophic for a lot of smaller towns.
Politically and economically, you can think of New York as actually two states, maybe three, lashed together. Downstate is rich, funded by high-skilled and high-productivity industries like finance and advertising. It's also liberal. Western and northern New York are poor, either rural or deindustrializing, and conservative.
In theory, this should be a good deal for New Yorkers outside the downstate area; they should enjoy high levels of government spending funded by richer people downstate. Instead, in some ways it’s proven a disaster. Decades of population decline mean that Democrats control the state assembly and drive policies -- like the Medicaid financing system -- that work well enough downstate, but prove disastrous in the rest of the state.
The heavy regulatory and tax burden on those poorer counties makes their problems worse. As population has declined, jobs and young skilled workers have fled, while the old and needy remained. Anyone thinking of moving back (and lots of exiles want to), faces not only the burden of finding a job, but also of paying the taxes that downstate politics require.
When the problem gets too bad, the state legislature tosses some money at those declining counties. But the fundamental problem doesn’t go away, and they continue to slowly strangle under a government burden designed for the politics and economics of a richer place.
Now the federal government is getting into the game. Republicans in Congress are going after those upstate legislators by tacking a provision onto the bill that would end matching federal funds for local government spending -- meaning that if New York wants to use the Medicaid program as a way to funnel federal money into the state (and oh, boy, it does), it would have to foot more of the bill for Medicaid itself.
As a policy matter, this makes sense. I believe strongly in pushing down to the lowest level of government possible, "letting a thousand flowers bloom,” as conservatives like to say. But this works only if that government gets to decide how much it spends, and how to spend it. Setting policy at a higher level, and then passing the bill down to the locals, is a formula for … well, pretty much what New York State’s got. Moreover, if you do view the government as a vehicle for redistribution, then it should redistribute -- not issue expensive mandates telling poorer places to pull themselves up by their bootstraps.
But the policy argument is almost incidental. What’s interesting is that this local dispute has ended up critical to the passage of a national bill. Republicans complained a lot about these sort of deals when Obamacare was passing, especially the notorious “Cornhusker Kickback.” Now they’re doing exactly the same thing, though aimed at a different constituency.
We can expect to see more of this in the future. As the population ages, and the income disparities between areas become sharper, fiscal decisions made decades ago are going to pit levels of government against each other. Consider Detroit’s bankruptcy, or the problems that California’s Citrus Pest Control District No. 2 had with CalPers. Local governments are going to be tempted to bypass recalcitrant state officials by getting their representatives to help them out. And as we can see, sometimes those representatives will be tempted to step in.


Comey Is Now the Most Powerful Person in Washington

One of the most important things we learned Monday from the House Intelligence Committee hearings on Russian influence of the 2016 elections was that the hackers may have wanted to get caught. FBI director James Comey said Russia's cyber intruders were "unusually loud," as though they "wanted us to see what they were doing."
That's counterintuitive. The Russians have officially denied taking active measures in the 2016 election. They have complained that the toxic environment in Washington has scuttled any chance for a reset in the relationship with the U.S. So if Kremlin proxies were meddling in the U.S., why would they want us to know?
Comey says this is because the specter of Russian interference in and of itself instills doubt about our electoral process. It gets people to freak out. It calls into question the legitimacy of the election Donald Trump just won. It divides us.
If that was the mission, then: mission accomplished.
Just consider Monday's hearing. It was really two hearings. Democrats made the case that Trump associates had deceived the public about their meetings with Russians and that there was at least a circumstantial case that they coordinated with Russia to influence the election against Hillary Clinton. Republicans meanwhile raised the prospect that they may call senior Obama administration officials to find out who disclosed monitored phone calls between Trump's first national security adviser, Michael Flynn, and Russia's ambassador, Sergey Kislyak.
This doesn't even factor in the bombshell announcement from Comey that there has been an active counter-intelligence investigation into Trump since late July. The FBI has investigated presidents before, but the bureau has never confirmed such a probe while it was ongoing. The very fact of the investigation effectively neuters Trump's presidency in what is supposed to be his honeymoon period.
All of that said, it would be a mistake to put all of this on the Russians. They did hack leading Democrats and doled out tidbits through WikiLeaks before voters went to the polls. Comey confirmed that Russian hackers probed some of the state voter rolls as well. The intelligence community's report in December concluded that Russia also ran propaganda against Clinton through its television network, RT, and worked with an army of online trolls to defame her.
But none of this gets to the real dilemma for the republic at the moment. The director of the FBI will in a practical sense determine the legitimacy of our elected president. This makes Comey the most powerful person in Washington.
It would be nice to blame the Russians for this sorry state of affairs, but really we can blame only ourselves.
This part of the story begins a month before the bureau begins snooping around about Russia's effort to influence the election. On June 27, on a tarmac in Phoenix, Attorney General Loretta Lynch met with Bill Clinton for about 45 minutes. We still don't know all the details of that conversation, but the appearance of impropriety in light of the bureau's own investigation of Hillary Clinton's email server was enough for Lynch to recuse herself from that process.
That left Comey in the position of being both the cop and the prosecutor. Not even a week later, the FBI director chastised Clinton for her recklessness with the private server, but said no reasonable prosecutor would recommend bringing charges. Republicans were aghast. In subsequent testimony before Congress, Comey promised to keep lawmakers informed of any further developments in the case. He did just that on Oct. 28, when he informed Congress the bureau had learned of new emails in an unconnected case and would be checking them in the week leading up to the election. It turns out it was a false alarm, but to this day, the Clinton camp believes Comey's announcement did serious political damage to the candidate.
Now enter Trump. The new attorney general, Jeff Sessions, recused himself from the Trump investigation because of his role as a surrogate on the Trump campaign and because he falsely denied having met with Russian officials. Yet again, an attorney general has elevated Comey to play an outsize role in our politics.
This is no way to run a great power. It's also a no-win situation for the FBI. After Monday's marathon hearing we are left with more questions than answers. Why did Comey, for example, confirm an ongoing investigation into Trump's associates, but remain mum on whether the bureau would look into who leaked Flynn's monitored phone calls to the press? Why couldn't Comey shed any light on what James Clapper, former director of national intelligence, told NBC earlier this month? He said he knew of no evidence of collusion between Russia and the Trump campaign. Why did Comey opt not to inform Congress about the Trump investigation in the summer or fall, when he held out the prospect that the Clinton probe would be reopened?
Much of this is on the FBI director. But it's also an indictment of our current political elites. The last two attorneys general made errors that forced them to abdicate their constitutional responsibility. The steady stream of leaks about the Trump investigation also forced Comey's hand. Let's not forget Trump's own tweets, in which he falsely accused Obama of wiretapping him, which prompted members of both parties to demand Comey address the allegations in open session.
Trump now has Comey's investigation hanging over his presidency. It's an irony of course. The man Democrats say helped Trump win the election may end up providing Congress with the means to impeach him. For this sorry state of affairs, Washington only has itself to blame.


Trump Voters Stand by Their Man

Democratic pollster Stanley Greenberg returned to Macomb County, Michigan, last month to observe the latest twists in the tortured relationship between the Democratic Party and white working-class voters.
Greenberg has been analyzing the white working class for a long time. He made his name with a 1985 report on Reagan Democrats, an earlier wave of white working-class voters who abandoned the Democrats, in Macomb. His focus on such voters, many of whom gave ready voice to racial resentments, alienated some powerful liberal Democrats.
Macomb, just north of Detroit, is Michigan's third-largest county and overwhelmingly white. Median household income is around $54,000, which nearly matches the national median. Macomb gave Barack Obama a majority of its votes in 2008 and again in 2012. But in 2016, the county flipped, hard. Donald Trump won Macomb by 48,000 votes. He won the entire state of Michigan by only 12,000.
Greenberg conducted four focus groups in February with a total of 35 white voters without college degrees -- Trump's base. As he wrote in his report, "racist sentiment, Islamophobia and disdain for multiculturalism" probably put many of these voters beyond the reach of Democratic appeals. But those for whom race is not decisive won't necessarily be easy to lure back to the Democratic camp either, according to Greenberg's report.
These voters have not regretted their vote for Trump. There was no “buyer’s remorse." . . . . They are clear about why they voted for him and pray he keeps his promises and succeeds.
They accept Trump’s version of the news and facts, and their reactions to videos of his press conferences and interviews reinforced that point.
Whether Trump, or anyone, can redeem these voters' faith in the long run is a different, and difficult, question. In an email exchange before Trump's inauguration, economist David Autor of Massachusetts Institute of Technology wrote:
It’s been a great quarter century for the non-rich world. For the rich world, it’s been a period of decelerating growth and a diminished view of future possibilities relative to the three decades immediately following World War II. Those three decades, however, were surely the best in history for the growth of the Western middle class. Somehow, that singular period has become conflated in people’s minds with “normal” -- so that all of our significant successes since that time are still viewed as a shortfall. When our president-elect says “Make America great again,” I assume that he longs for exactly that era. Ironically, an era of similarly rapidly increasing prosperity is underway, but it’s happening in the developing world, not in the West.
According to data compiled by the Detroit News, manufacturing jobs in Macomb dropped by half from 2000 to 2010, from 106,000 to 52,000. In 2015, the number stood at 62,000. Abundant, high-paying blue-collar jobs (or strong industrial unions) seem highly unlikely to return despite Trump's promises. But that doesn't mean Trump will necessarily get the blame.
In an interview, Greenberg said Macomb voters seem prepared to give Trump a pass on results, possibly for a long time. Instead, they'll likely blame the Republican Congress for any disappointments. "In the short term, you can see them pulling off Republicans very easily," Greenberg said, citing the midterm election in 2018. Greenberg believes Trump may, however, prove vulnerable on GOP changes to Obamacare. If Republican legislation passes Congress, and Trump signs it, it will almost certainly reduce insurance coverage for millions while raising consumer costs.
"The health care stuff is potentially damaging,” Greenberg said. “They think his promise is better insurance for less money.”
Democrats are weighing whether voters like Greenberg's Macomb groups are worth pursuing, and at what cost. A February report from the liberal Center for American Progress pointed out that from 1980 to 2014, the percentage of the voting-age population with a college degree roughly doubled, from 15 percent to 30 percent. College-educated whites accounted for two-thirds of the increase. As the electorate grows more educated, the white working class vote diminishes.
Meanwhile, three states -- California, New Mexico and Texas -- had a nonwhite majority in 2016. If demographic patterns hold, the CAP report stated, 18 more states will become "majority-minority" over the next 44 years.
"The right populist movement is riding on demographic borrowed time," CAP senior fellow Ruy Teixeira wrote earlier this month. Teixeira, the author of "The Optimistic Leftist: Why the 21st Century Will be Better Than You Think," added that "the white non-college-educated share of voters declined by 19 percentage points just between the 1988 and 2012 presidential elections. Projections indicate that this group’s share of voters should continue to decline by 2-3 points every presidential election for decades."
Greenberg doesn't believe that Democrats can rely on a diverse, more affluent, metro-centered coalition to produce reliable returns. Too many states are too rural and too white, and will remain so for too long. "It leaves you in a weak position,” he said. “You're always going to struggle to control the Senate. My view is we need to do better with all groups."
Democrats, he maintains, under-perform with working-class voters of all races. "We've been losing working people," he said. Working-class white men, cut loose from the mediating influence and organizing power of a union, will be especially hard to reel in.
In an email quoted by Thomas Edsall in the New York Times, David Leege, an emeritus professor of political science at Notre Dame, addressed the challenges faced by working-class American men who feel they are losing ground in a high-technology information age that devalues them.
Leege wrote:
The institutions they knew to process authoritatively the economic and social changes they faced in earlier times are gone or undermined -- the union, the Catholic Church, the industrial bar with co-workers, the compliant wife -- and what has replaced it, if anything, is an unvetted information technology that yields little truth or comfort, and nurtures anomie and anger.
Anomie and anger are Trump's canvas. His validation of sexism, racial animus and xenophobia may never produce high-paying jobs, but the Democrats' multiculturalism hasn't either. According to Greenberg, the people in his Macomb groups feel as if they are "under siege," sometimes even in their own households, where their support for Trump has been attacked by members of their family or community.
"They think there's a civil war in the country," Greenberg said. Having chosen Trump's side in the fight, they overlook his serial dishonesty, emotional imbalance, self-enrichment and broad-based incompetence. At least for now.
"When we play his press conference, which the media was very derisive about, they listen," Greenberg said. "And they trust him."


Democrats: Don't Use Republican Playbook on Gorsuch

Democrats long complained about the way Republicans treated President Barack Obama. When Republicans refused to cooperate on legislation, when they threatened to shut down the government, when they stonewalled his Supreme Court nominee, Democrats lambasted them -- and justifiably so -- for dereliction of duty. Yet now that Donald Trump is in the White House, Democrats are threatening to adopt the very same tactics, concluding that they need to fight like Republicans. In other words, it’s their turn to act irresponsibly.
Of course, what goes around comes around, and the hunger for payback among Democrats is understandable. But the rule we all teach our children applies to Congress as well: Two wrongs don’t make a right.
The Democrats’ drift toward obstructionism is rooted in a fallacy: that the 2016 election was a validation of the Republicans’ obstructionist strategy in Congress. Standing in the way of the other party’s progress, the theory goes, is the best way to win back power. But Republicans won in 2016 in spite of Congress (which was deeply unpopular), not because of it. In addition, they were helped by a weak candidate at the top of the Democratic ticket and a Republican candidate who made inroads in Democratic areas partly because he ran against Washington’s dysfunction.
Nevertheless, liberal activists and interest groups are out for blood. They are now threatening to mount a primary challenge against any Democratic senator who shows an interest in bipartisanship. That’s the same strategy the Tea Party used to pressure Republicans into blocking cooperation with Obama.
Proponents of the obstructionist strategy argue that the ends justify the means – that any tactic to thwart the other side is acceptable. They couldn't be more wrong. No party has a monopoly on wisdom. Absolutism and extreme partisanship crowd out both compromise and fresh ideas. They also threaten the stability of our most vital democratic institutions: the judiciary, Congress and the presidency. Let’s consider each.
Republicans were wrong to stonewall Obama’s nominee to the Supreme Court, Merrick Garland. (Of course, Democrats had promised to use the tactic years earlier had a vacancy occurred under Republican presidents.) But the fact remains that the country needs a full complement of justices -- not only to break ties on major issues, but also to prevent a breakdown of constitutional order.
By all objective accounts, including from the American Bar Association, Gorsuch is a highly qualified nominee. He is not, of course, the person Democrats would have selected. But Democrats had a chance to determine the court’s make-up by electing their presidential nominee, and they failed. As President Obama once said, “Elections have consequences.” One of them is that the president gets to nominate and appoint justices to the Supreme Court.
If Democrats use the filibuster to block a vote on Gorsuch, the long tradition of approving high court nominations based on credentials rather than politics -- now on life support -- will die, and the court’s credibility will suffer for it. Moreover, while a filibuster may be cathartic, it won’t be effective. Republicans can simply eliminate it, as Democrats did for federal judges under Majority Leader Harry Reid.
Rather than overplay their hand, Democratic senators should use the confirmation hearing to ask questions that reveal how Gorsuch thinks about legal questions, rather than what he thinks about particular issues. Attempting to pin him down on how he would rule in a certain case is a futile exercise.
Instead, they should probe his intellect, judgment, record, and approach to stare decisis. (This was the approach that guided me in appointing judges to New York City’s courts -- never once did I ask, or learn, a candidate’s party affiliation or political leaning.) Democrats don’t need to vote for Gorsuch to vote against a filibuster, and they don’t need to agree with his judicial philosophy to vote for his confirmation.
The willingness of Democrats to adopt recent Republican tactics does not seem to be stopping with the judiciary. It's deeply troubling, for instance, that Senate Democrats are raising the possibility of a government shutdown if funding for a border wall is included in the budget.
When Senator Ted Cruz led the efforts to shut down the government rather than adopt budget resolutions funding the Affordable Care Act and Planned Parenthood, Democrats were outraged – and many Republicans opposed him.
Yet now, it is Democratic leaders, not just the most extreme members of the party, who are adopting Cruz’s tactics. They think -- wrongly, in my view -- that they will not be blamed by the public for a shutdown. But politics aside, shutting down the government would harm the American public and normalize a tactic that both parties should reject. That’s why I will support those who reject this tactic and show genuine interest in bipartisanship.
It is true that Republican obstructionism served, albeit imperfectly, the party’s interest in smaller government. Democratic obstructionism would have the opposite effect. Thwarting progress on issues where there is potential for cooperation would undercut the party’s commitment to using government to address problems. When it comes to the party’s priorities, from supporting working families to investing in infrastructure, winning small victories is better than winning nothing at all.
And then there's the executive branch. It is dispiriting that Democrats seem to have a newfound willingness to diminish public respect for the office of the president. Democrats rightly decried birthers for attempting to delegitimize President Obama. This was a fringe movement, but Republican leaders allowed it to persist for far too long. Now Democrats are in danger of making the same mistake. They were outraged -- rightly -- when Trump equivocated in the closing days of the campaign as to whether he would accept the voters’ verdict. But immediately after it was rendered, “Not My President” became a rallying cry on the left, and party leaders have said little to rein it in.
One can strongly support an independent and comprehensive investigation into Russian interference in the election -- as I do -- and still recognize that democracy only works if the losers accept election results. When they refuse to do so, when they seek to delegitimize a victor through defamation or denial, the risk of civil unrest increases. We are on a dangerous trend line.
Democrats who have criticized President Trump for failing to respect the office’s behavioral norms -- including by making wildly unsubstantiated claims and attacking federal judges -- ought to recognize that the stakes are far larger than this president, this Congress and this court. They also ought to recognize that engaging in flagrant hypocrisy will only fuel the “post-truth” society that right-wing media outlets have cultivated. When neither party respects the basic tenets of honesty, people believe whichever side they agree with whatever the facts -- or alternative facts -- may be.
It’s true that Republicans have little standing to complain about hypocrisy, given their record. But for their own good, and the good of the party, Democrats should muster the courage of their convictions and refuse to join a race to the bottom. Doing so would allow for bipartisan cooperation on a broad range of critical issues, from a bold infrastructure bill to improvements to our broken immigration system. Most important, it would protect the constitution -- and with it, our freedoms -- against the ravages of extreme partisanship.


Steve Bannon's Preposterous 'Rosebud' Moment

White House strategist Steve Bannon understands how narrative works. In Hollywood films, at least the assembly-line models, plot points are inserted to send the hero off on a quest and, later, to send the action veering in an unexpected (well, sort of) new direction. They explain the hero to himself and others, give him a goal and erect obstacles (drama!) in the path of achieving it.
Bannon, who made documentary films before becoming chairman of the propaganda website Breitbart, has offered reporters his own plot point to explain how a multimillionaire Harvard Business School graduate and Goldman Sachs alumnus acquired his "fiery populism."
Bannon's father, Marty Bannon, worked and saved his whole life only to get clobbered by the financial crisis. I'll let the Richmond Times-Dispatch deliver the elevator pitch: "When Steve Bannon saw Wall Street’s recklessness hit home and the impact on his father," the paper reported in November, "it fueled his rage against a system he now describes as 'socialism for the wealthy,' where benefits accrue to those at the top while the downside is spread among the masses."
The Wall Street Journal this week put the elevator pitch into long form. Marty Bannon, it seems, had put his faith in the stock of AT&T Inc., the company for which he worked for half a century. When the financial crisis hit, the senior Bannon didn't turn to his wealthy and successful financier son for advice. He panicked and sold, losing more than $100,000.
The Journal reported: "There were many factors that turned Steve Bannon into a divisive political firebrand. But his decision to embrace 'economic nationalism' and vehemently oppose the forces and institutions of globalization, he says, stems from his upbringing, his relationship with his father and the meaning those AT&T shares held for the family.
Bannon concurs: “Everything since then has come from there,” he told the Journal. “All of it.”
It's quite a Rosebud moment, and a compelling example of what Vanity Fair called "the frame in which Bannon views how policies have historically been manipulated to the benefit of elites and to the detriment of the working class."
The reckless and contemptuous elites tank the global economy without remorse or penalty. Bannon's dad, now 95, makes a bad stock trade in a panic, and our hero, his son, goes off on a quest to avenge the dignity of the average working man who has been so brutally betrayed.
Where to begin?
Imagine, for a moment, a Hollywood producer -- I once saw a yacht-sized Mercedes on Wilshire Boulevard with the license plate "IDEAMAN," so let's make it that guy -- taking this feeble, generic script and offering Bannon's real-life trajectory as the conclusion.
Here's how our story ends.
To avenge his middle-class father, Bannon goes to work for the heir of a real-estate fortune whose standard operating practice over decades has been to cheat people -- tradesmen, contractors -- who aren't rich or powerful enough to be able to afford to sue him. People, in other words, like Marty Bannon.
When the heir wins the presidency, Bannon follows him to the White House where they promptly propose to relieve 24 million regular Joes and Josephines of their health insurance while giving the very wealthiest people in the country giant tax cuts. Oh, and the administration turns out to be chock full of Goldman Sachs alumni, including a Treasury secretary who made a fortune as the "foreclosure king," destroying the households (and wealth) of lots and lots of Marty Bannons.
So if you want to know why Steve Bannon ran a website that became a digital drag bar for neo-Nazis and racists, or why he is determined to ban desperate, war-ravaged Muslim refugees from reaching American shores, or to deport mothers of American children to nations they haven't seen in years, or to stop subsidizing health insurance for the poor and middle class, or to eliminate environmental safeguards, or to deregulate Wall Street so that it has fewer constraints in exploiting vulnerable investors, or to deliver vast tax cuts to extremely wealthy people like Steve Bannon -- all while the president of the United States conceals his tax returns and sells the presidency for profit, well, it all comes down to what the elites did to poor Marty Bannon.
“Everything since then has come from there,” Bannon said. “All of it.”
Please.


Why Federal Workers Get Paid More

As measured by head count, the federal government isn't growing, and it hasn't really grown since the 1970s. The number of federal workers was 2.83 million in February, according to the monthly employment report released last week by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. As I wrote in a subsequent column, that's about as many federal workers as there were in 1975 -- and while the rising use of government contractors changes the picture somewhat, it doesn't seem to change it much. Over this same period, total nonfarm payroll employment in the U.S. has almost doubled.
So that's really interesting -- and seemingly at odds with the widespread view that "big government" just keeps getting bigger and scarier. It also raises questions about whether the massive spending cutbacks at most government agencies that President Donald Trump is proposing today are really such a brilliant idea.
But employee head count is not the only valid measure of government size and scope. One reader suggested, for example, that I look at what federal workers are paid relative to private-sector workers. So I did:
In the third quarter of 2001, the average weekly wage of federal workers was 1.39 times that of private-sector workers. By the third quarter of 2016, that ratio had grown to 1.58.
Some version of this chart gets trotted out pretty frequently, usually to make the point that federal workers are overpaid and we could save taxpayer money by paying them less. It's a bit more complicated than that; federal workers do different things and do them in different places than private-sector workers, and the pay differential in part reflects that.
Various attempts have been made to correct for these differences and have arrived at dramatically different conclusions. The Federal Salary Council, a government advisory body composed of labor experts and government-employee representatives, regularly finds that federal employees make about a third less than people doing similar work in the private sector. The conservative American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation, on the other hand, have estimated that federal employees make 14 percent and 22 percent more, respectively, than comparable private-sector workers.
Part of the issue is whether and how you count benefits. When the Congressional Budget Office looked into this matter in 2012, it found that federal workers were paid about the same (2 percent more, to be precise) than private-sector workers with "similar observable attributes" (age, education level, race, etc.) from 2005 through 2010. But when the CBO included estimated benefits, federal workers were 16 percent ahead. The biggest difference in benefits is that most federal workers get a defined-benefit pension, while most private-sector workers don't.
The CBO also found that the relationship between federal and private-sector compensation depends a lot on how much education a worker has:
The most educated government workers make less than they could in the private sector. Other college-educated government workers get similar or slightly worse pay, but they come out better after benefits are counted. And workers without college degrees are far better off with the feds than in the private sector.
But here's the thing: The federal civilian labor force (none of the numbers in this column include active-duty military) is skewed toward the better-educated. Only 20 percent of federal workers had a high school diploma or less, the CBO reported, compared with 41 percent of the private-sector workforce. And 21 percent of federal workers had a master's degree or higher, compared with 10 percent of the private-sector workforce.
This high percentage of highly educated workers is probably the biggest reason average federal wages are so much higher than private-sector wages -- even though those highly educated federal workers make less than they could in the private sector. It may also be a reason why the government is so distrusted.
The federal government, to use the terminology of populist Trump precursor George Wallace, employs a lot of "pointy-headed intellectuals who can't park their bicycles straight." Or, to use the terminology of Brookings Institution senior fellow Philip Wallach, which I have cited before:
Only specialist elites seem to possess any ability to guide policy development, and trust in them has been diminished both by their increasing segregation and their evident failures.
So do federal workers get paid too much? I don't know! But the mere fact that they get paid more than private-sector workers seems to be of some political significance.


How We Choose Determines Who We Choose

Dutch voters going to the polls today had 28 different parties to choose from. Twelve of those (such as the Non-Voters, Pirates and Jesus Lives parties) weren't on ballots everywhere in the country, and several others don't appear to have gotten enough votes for a seat in parliament. But exit polls indicate that 13 parties will be represented in the 150-member body, with six parties having 14 seats or more -- and the biggest only 31.
What this will mean next is lengthy negotiations (the record is 208 days, in 1977) to cobble together either a majority government or a minority one with support from other parties. It seems pretty clear from the get-go that Geert Wilders's populist-nationalist Party for Freedom won't be part of that government, but beyond that it really is up in the air, and it will remain so for quite a while after the election.
So that's one way to choose a government in a democracy. In a few weeks, on April 23, French voters will begin participating in another: choosing among 18 candidates for president (five of whom have received significant support in polls conducted so far). The top two vote-getters will then face off in another election on May 7. Then the 577 members of the National Assembly will be elected by district, in similar two-round fashion, in June. Marine Le Pen of the populist-nationalist National Front party seems almost certain to make it into the presidential runoff but pretty likely to lose it -- although recent polling experiences with Brexit in the U.K. and Donald Trump in the U.S. make people wary of predicting the latter with too much confidence. In the National Assembly, though, Le Pen's party currently holds only two seats, so even if it improves on that result in a big way, it seems awfully unlikely that it will command a majority or even be able to form one with cooperation from another party.
Here in the U.S., we of course conducted our own experiment in democratic choice last year. After months of party primaries and caucuses, the two dominant political parties selected presidential candidates, one an establishment political veteran of center-left leanings, the other a populist-nationalist political neophyte. Those two then fought it out in a general election in which there were also a few minor candidates, and which was determined on a state-by-state basis -- whoever won the plurality of the popular vote in most states got all of the electoral votes. A new House of Representatives and Senate were selected at the same time, mostly using party primaries to select candidates as in the presidential election but with a few states using a French-style top-two primary.
Those are all pretty different ways of choosing a government! And they result in different kinds of governments being chosen. This is an obvious enough observation, but it's still fascinating to watch in action.
In the Netherlands, for example, voters are remarkably comfortable, and seem to be getting ever more so, with switching parties from election to election. A frequent topic of conversation when I was there last month were the online voter guides -- StemWijzer (Voting Guide) and Kieskompas (Choice Compass) are the big two -- that ask you a bunch of questions about your political views and then churn out a party preference. "I got Party for the Animals!" one friend told me. "Who knew?"
It's all quite endearing -- these people are so open-minded and unpolarized! Then again, on the map of the political spectrum that Kieskompas churns out, most of the parties land in two big clusters. So maybe all that people are finding out from StemWijzer and Kieskompas is which party in the left-progressive or right-conservative cluster suits them best, not which cluster they belong in:
That marker near the middle is me. Somewhat to my surprise, Kieskompas told me my views coincided most with those of the Christian Union, a small party somewhat to the left of the much bigger Christian Democratic Appeal (which is what StemWijzer told me I should vote for). I'm not Dutch, so I'm not actually voting, but if I were I would apparently be part of the country's shrinking political center.
Still, the Dutch system does seem to encourage weaker party identification and thus a less polarized, tribal political debate than we often get in the U.S. On the flip side, it leaves the actual formation of governments to negotiations among party leaders -- meaning that, if you are so inclined, as populist Wilders is, you could with some justification depict the country's governance system as rule by a permanent political elite.
In the U.S., meanwhile, political polarization has reached levels not seen since the Civil War, raising questions about whether our electoral methods are part of the problem and need to be changed. The biggest recent reforms have been California and Washington's switching from party primaries to top-two primaries (Louisiana has long had such a system, as has Nebraska for state legislative races), but there's not much evidence that this has actually reduced polarization. Dutch-style proportional voting does not seem to be on the agenda; I had forgotten this, but one of the reasons President Bill Clinton gave for withdrawing his support for law professor Lani Guinier as head of the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division in 1993 was that she supported proportional representation, which he called "antidemocratic and very difficult to defend."
The reform idea that has been getting the most favorable attention lately is ranked voting, which allows voters to list preferences beyond their first choice and uses these secondary choices to determine a winner if no one has a majority of first-choice votes. Several countries, Australian and Canadian provinces, and U.S. cities and towns already do this. In a January article in the New York Review of Books, economics Nobelists Eric Maskin and Amartya Sen argued that such a voting system
comes closer to satisfying people’s preferences than any other method, including the current one. After 224 years, perhaps it is time to change the rules of the game.
You may disagree (one big selling point they offered for ranked voting was that it would probably have kept Trump out of the White House). But it does seem important to acknowledge that those rules of the game play a really big role in determining the result.


Republicans Keep Repeating the Same Tax Mistake

It looks as if Governor Sam Brownback may be leaving Kansas to take up a job at the United Nations. Brownback’s critics, of which there are many, charge that having led his state into a fiscal crisis, he’s bailing out on the wagon train while the rest of his party staggers onward over the cliff. “Brownback would be fleeing a political and economic crisis,” writes Alan Pyke of ThinkProgress, “leaving about 3 million Kansans behind in a budgetary inferno of his own devising.”
You can certainly see why Brownback would want to get out. After Republicans pushed through aggressive tax cuts in 2012 and 2013, the state keeps coming up with deep budget holes that have to be patched in an annual scramble. This year’s drama is still being played out after the governor vetoed a plan to raise taxes, and the state Senate responded by crushing Brownback’s proposed alternative.
For budget wonks, the saga of the Kansas budget will be reminiscent of the Reagan years, when supply-side tax cuts resulted in big deficits. The administration had hoped that the tax cuts could be paid for by a combination of faster economic growth unleashed by lower marginal rates, and the infamous “magic asterisk” (in which unidentified spending cuts were promised, details to come later).
Such rosy hopes are never sustained for long; the cruel arithmetic of inflow and outflow cannot long be dammed, or hidden. Reagan was forced to do another tax reform a few years later, hiding the fact that he was increasing taxes by cutting marginal rates but doing away with the generous exemptions that had dramatically lessened what people actually paid. Nonetheless, it took two more tax hikes -- under Bush the First, and Clinton -- to get the budget into some semblance of structural balance.
History does not repeat itself, but it often stutters. Which raises an interesting question: Why has this happened more than once? Was the example set under Reagan not clear enough?
The answer is, I think, that a lot of Republicans have a view of how taxes affect labor markets that is simple, intuitive, and wrong. (Not necessarily any less wrong than what Democrats think, mind you. But differently wrong, and in a way that matters here).
The basic intuition driving a lot of Republican conversation on taxes is simple: Taxes discourage work. After all, if your taxes go up from 30 percent of your income to 40 percent, you’ve essentially taken a 15 percent pay cut. In general, if the reward for doing something goes down, you will do less of it. Ergo, the higher the taxes, the lower the work effort.
We can take this further with a simple observation: If the tax rate on your efforts is 100 percent -- that is to say, if you are allowed to keep none of the fruits of your own labor, not so much as a pen filched from the office supplies -- then you will not work, because what’s the point? Then the government will get no revenue from its 100 percent rate. If the tax rate is zero percent, you will also not generate any revenue for the government. Somewhere in between those points, there is a rate at which the maximum amount of tax revenue will be raised; any tax rate higher than that will cause revenue to start declining again.
Many of you will recognize that I am describing the famous Laffer curve. And the Laffer curve is absolutely right -- for some effective tax rates. It has not, however, turned out to be correct for the tax rates actually prevailing in the United States during the later postwar era. Relatively modest decreases from modest tax levels do not increase economic growth enough to offset the losses from the lower tax rate, at least not in the short or medium term. In fact, they may not increase economic growth at all.
How can I say that? How can I call myself a libertarian? Don’t I understand Econ 101?
Well, yes. But here’s another concept from Econ 101 that is crucial to understanding why tax cuts have not worked out as some Republicans hoped: elasticity.
Elasticity tells us how strongly people respond to price changes. We say that goods are price inelastic when demand doesn’t change much no matter how high the price goes (think of drinking water in the desert). A very elastic good, on the other hand, is one where the price matters a great deal. Think of, say, those little paper umbrellas they put in drinks. Many of us would probably be willing to pay a penny to give our drinks a pretty little shade from the sun. Many of us would refuse to pay a dollar. Almost no one would splurge as much as $5 for such a superfluous decoration.
People who expected great things from tax cuts were essentially hoping that labor supply was very elastic; if you changed the price people got for working, they’d respond by working a lot more. It turned out to not be not nearly as responsive as hoped, in part because this mental model of how markets worked was incomplete.
You see, people had been thinking of labor supply as being a pretty simple matter of substitution effects. What do I mean by that? Well, work involves a trade-off between leisure, and consumption of everything else. High income tax rates essentially worsen the exchange rate between leisure and “everything else,” so that people tend to consume more leisure than they would in a world without the taxes. Thus, everyone ends up materially poorer, though richer in free time. Cutting those tax rates, it was theorized, would make work more attractive.  We’d get a lot more “everything else,” some of which could be skimmed off the top by the government to make up for the tax revenue they’d lost by cutting rates.
Unfortunately, they’d forgotten about income effects: Our demand for goods changes as our income does. If you only have $5 to spend for one day’s worth of food, a loaf of bread and a jar of generic peanut butter probably sounds like a pretty decent way to allocate your cash. As you get a little more money, you might buy brand-name peanut butter, maybe some jelly. By the time your food budget reaches $1,000 for the day, you’re probably not eating peanut butter at all.
This is as true of leisure as it is of everything else. Yes, as your hourly wage rises, each additional hour of leisure is more costly in terms of other stuff you could buy. On the other hand, it’s also more enjoyable. If all you can afford to do with your leisure time is sit on your stoop and talk to your neighbor about her cat’s angina, you’re not really giving up much by going to work. If you have a yacht and can afford to cruise around the world staying in fine resorts, each hour of leisure lost is more painful.
I haven’t even gotten into complex effects, like the fact that many high-income, high-status people like working. I mean, they also like paying lower taxes, because who doesn’t like more money? But that doesn’t mean that if you lower their tax rates, you’ll actually get substantially more effort out of them. They may already be working about as hard as they can without dropping dead.
These are empirical questions, mind you: Whether the substitution effects of lower taxes outweigh the income effects depends on many factors, including how high the existing tax rate is, what sort of value your culture places on work and leisure, how much flexibility you have to decide how many hours you work, and how enjoyable the work available is. But it’s safe to say that in America, in the late 20th and early 21st century, they didn’t outweigh the income effects, and the other various factors keeping work rates relatively constant, enough to pay for themselves, or even come close. Nor did they dramatically goose the growth rate. As long as tax rates are kept within a reasonable range, most of what happens in the economy will end up being determined by other factors, such as regulation, technological change, demographics, and the individual decisions made by millions of people about what they want to do with their lives.
And yet, this simple view of how taxes affect labor supply remains common currency among Republican voters, and Republican politicians. What happened in Kansas is a reminder of the costs of betting too hard on what we know that ain’t so.


Win or Lose, Trumpcare Is Bad for Republicans

If House Republicans enact their health-care bill, they're screwed. They'll have lost the critical initial dialogue and left opponents salivating. If they fail to pass it, they're screwed, too, having broken a commitment of the past four elections.
The Trumpcare debacle confirms the wisdom of the late Republican pollster Bob Teeter, who predicted a couple of decades ago that health care would be a loser for whichever political party owns it.
There's another lesson in the Republicans' angst, but this one's for both parties: It's almost impossible for Congress to succeed in something big on a partisan basis. President Barack Obama was rebuffed by Republicans on Obamacare eight years ago and paid a heavy price; now Speaker Paul Ryan and his colleagues are the ones likely to bear the political cost.
It's hard to reverse the terms of debate set in the early stages of a big legislative battle. Remember in 2009 the charges that Obamacare would set up death panels to decide whether grandmothers should live or die? It was false, but it resonated.
Now Ryan and the White House are on the defensive after an analysis by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office forecast that their plan would result in the loss of health insurance coverage by 24 million Americans over the coming decade.
Democrats are drawing blood with charges that the plan cuts care for the poor to finance big tax cuts for the wealthy. Conservatives are complaining that proposed tax credits to help people buy insurance amount to too much government. Moderate Republican governors are saying it's bad for their states because it cuts back on Medicaid financing that added millions of people to the insurance rolls.
Think of those arguments as raw material for an anti-Trumpcare ad campaign reminiscent of the "Harry and Louise" commercials that helped dash President Bill Clinton's hopes for comprehensive health-care reform in 1994.
In those 30-second spots, a fictional American couple invented by insurance-industry lobbyists fretted at a suburban kitchen table about losing trusted doctors and control of their medical destinies. (That was before they re-emerged briefly in 2009 in support of Obamacare.)
Imagine some of today's Harrys and Louises: a 62-year-old man echoing complaints of the AARP that he would have to pay more while younger, healthier people pay less; a cancer patient who worries that she'll lose access to treatments that were covered under Obamacare; a struggling lower-income couple who would be threatened with losing Medicaid coverage; perhaps a handful of working-class citizens griping around a coffee table about how rich people were spending the tax cuts paid for by their vanished insurance subsidies.
Another lesson to be learned is the danger of hyperbole or careless language. Republicans, more than six years after the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, still were reprising Obama's broken promise, "If you like your health care plan, you can keep it."
They, then, should be cognizant of the danger lurking in the campaign promise of their current leader, the man now in the White House, when he declared, "I'm not going to cut Medicare or Medicaid." In truth, Trumpcare reduces federal Medicaid spending by $880 billion over a decade. To Ryan, that may be reform; to the poor or those with disabilities it's just less health care.
Then there's Representative Jason Chaffetz, the Utah Republican who suggested that the GOP plan might encourage lower-income Americans to make necessary choices between health insurance and "getting that new iPhone." And Representative Ron DeSantis, the Florida Republican who said that a cancer patient didn't really need Obamacare coverage subsidies because even without insurance she could "show up to the emergency room."
Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont Democrat who gave Hillary Clinton a scare from the party's left flank during the presidential primary season, got a good reception this week when he took an anti-Trumpcare case to the heart of Trump country, West Virginia. Along with Kentucky and Arkansas, it is one of the three states with the sharpest reductions in uninsured rates over the past three years, largely as a result of Obamacare. These culturally conservative states voted overwhelmingly for Trump last November. The beneficiaries of expanding health-insurance coverage in these states aren't primarily immigrants or people of color; they are white, working-class voters, Trump supporters who bought into his campaign rhetoric.
But if passage of their Obamacare-replacement plan would expose Republicans to political peril, failure to pass it would be as bad, maybe worse. In 2010, 2012, 2014 and last fall, the vast majority of Republican congressional candidates promised to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. It was a promise they weren't expected to keep as long as they lacked both a congressional majority and the White House. Now that they have both, there are no excuses.
Trump, who probably cares little and knows less about the specifics of his party's legislation, has said if it fails to pass then Republicans can blame the health-care mess on Obama and Obamacare. He may have forgotten that he promised voters he would produce a plan that would "cover everybody" and be "much better." Voters may overlook some of his reckless vows, but they won't forget this one.


CBO Exposes Republican Penchant for Deceit

The Congressional Budget Office analysis of the Republican health-care bill did not disappoint. Republicans feared it would be catastrophic. It is. Instead of "better health care for more people at a lesser cost," as President Donald Trump promised, the nonpartisan CBO report released Monday said the Republican plan would drop 24 million from the insurance rolls by the end of the next decade -- and 14 million by 2018.
Republicans have never tried to grapple with the realities of health care. In attacking Obamacare over the past eight years, they alternated between hysteria and subterfuge.
When Democrats passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010, Republican Senator Tom Coburn announced that, as a result of the ACA's passage, "There will be no insurance industry left in three years."
Since Coburn, who is now retired, rang the industry's death knell, insurance stocks are up around 100 percent.
In 2011, Paul Ryan, then the House Budget Committee chairman, predicted that the Affordable Care Act would "collapse under its own weight."
Six years later, the ACA is providing health insurance, via Medicaid and private insurance exchanges, to roughly 20 million Americans.
That same year, then-Speaker of the House John Boehner said that the ACA "will bankrupt our nation, and it will ruin our economy!”
In reality, as the ACA came into effect, the U.S. economy grew, job growth accelerated and the federal deficit declined.
These were not the comments of cranks. Until Trump's election, Boehner and Ryan were, in succession, the highest ranking Republicans in the land. Coburn, in addition to being a doctor, had a reputation as one of the more principled fiscal conservatives in Washington.
Republican rhetoric on the ACA started out reckless and never really improved. Sarah Palin gets too much credit; plenty of mainstream Republicans played the game. In 2009, Republican Senator Charles Grassley, the ranking member on the Senate Finance Committee, where he was intimately involved in substantive negotiations on the ACA, went home to Iowa and pretended that the bill included death panels. "We should not have a government program that determines if you're going to pull the plug on grandma," he said at a town hall.
The beat goes on. Republicans spent the past week preemptively bashing the CBO knowing that it would expose Trump's promises as a sham. On Sunday, Trump's Health and Human Services secretary Tom Price told Chuck Todd, "I firmly believe that nobody will be worse off financially" from the GOP health-care bill. Price didn't have the devastating numbers from CBO in hand. But the former House Budget Committee chairman had written his own health-care bill when he was in Congress. He surely knew he was not telling anything remotely like the truth.
One thing about people who accustom themselves to deceit is that, sooner or later, they start lying to one another as well as to themselves. Health care discussions between the White House and Congressional Republicans promise to be loads of fun in the days ahead.


South Korea Does Impeachment Right

South Korea’s president Park Geun-hye was officially removed from office Friday after the constitutional court affirmed her impeachment by the national assembly. It’s a remarkable outcome for a relatively new democracy, and the scandal holds some important lessons for how impeachment can take place in a political culture deeply dominated by partisanship.
Park’s removal depended on three key elements: peaceful, sustained popular protests; a corruption scandal so egregious that even politicians from Park’s party were forced to admit it merited impeachment; and an orderly constitutional process for removal that was followed to the letter. These elements arguably form a kind of blueprint for presidential removal, a process pretty similar to the one followed by Brazil in the impeachment and removal of President Dilma Rousseff in 2015-16.
It’s important to note that South Korea isn’t a natural political environment for impeachment, because its politics are divided between two main parties: Park’s center-right Liberty Korea Party is opposed by the center-left Together Democratic Party. Both are descendants of earlier parties that go back to the period of democratization in the 1980s. Including Park herself, there have been six presidents since the declaration of the Sixth Republic, a useful shorthand for the onset of democracy. Of those, three were left-ish and three right-ish. A system that features just two major parties makes removal difficult, because no party likes to see its own president removed from office.
And the South Korean legal structure doesn’t make impeachment easy. Under the Korean constitution, an impeachment resolution against the president must be introduced by a majority of the national assembly. Then a vote of two-thirds is required for the impeachment to pass.
And that’s not the end of the process. The constitutional court must then adjudicate and affirm the impeachment. As laid out in the Constitutional Court Act of 1988, the court has to determine whether the president violated “the Constitution or laws in the performance of his/her duties.” The law provides for oral pleadings and a hearing.
Taken together, the partisan structure of Korean politics, the supermajority requirement in the assembly and the reviewing role of the constitutional court make impeachment hard.
The process is harder than the American removal process. That requires impeachment by a majority of the House and conviction by two-thirds of the Senate, measures that bear a family resemblance to the legislative part of the Korean process. But the judiciary has no decisive role in an American impeachment, except for the symbolic function of the chief justice of the United States presiding over the Senate trial.
In South Korea, popular protests against Park were a major element in shifting her party’s perception of its own interests, convincing members that they had more to lose by ignoring the president’s unpopularity than to gain by toughing it out. In particular, it mattered very much that the protests were peaceful and orderly, and did not threaten the democratic process itself.
To be sure, there were also very large counterprotests in favor of Park. The opponents put perhaps 2 million people on the streets against her, and the pro-Park forces got roughly a million in their largest protest. But the outpouring of public desire for Park’s removal clearly played a major role in changing her party’s position.
The other major reason that the political calculus shifted was the nature of the corruption scandal that surrounded Park. She is hardly the first corrupt official in South Korean political history. Close ties between the presidency and the owners of the major Korean conglomerates, or chaebol, go back to her father’s era. But the scale of the wealth transfer from the chaebol to the president’s family and associates was big enough that it couldn’t be ignored.
There were other, more sensational elements to the scandal, such as reports that a close friend of Park’s, who was at the heart of the bribery, was arranging shamanic rituals for the president to facilitate communication with the dead. And there was the strange matter of Park’s apparent disappearance immediately after a ferry disaster that killed 304 passengers and crew.
But in the end, these details mattered less than the clarity of the corruption. Ultimately, 62 members of Park’s party voted for her removal. Added to the votes of major and minor opposition parties, this got past the two-thirds threshold for removal.
That left the constitutional court’s review as the final key element of the removal process. The unanimous decision by the constitutional court was not unexpected. But it provided a guarantee of the democratic legitimacy of the removal process. That legitimacy is what makes impeachment different from a coup. It’s why Seoul Plaza is not Tahrir Square in Cairo.
Park’s supporters took to the streets again in the aftermath of the decision Friday, and two of them died in the protests, one reportedly after falling from the top of a police bus.
Despite this deviation from the general peacefulness of the protests, the overwhelming likelihood is that the process will be seen as legitimate. The removal system worked. Other countries should be so lucky.


Democrats Strike Back in the Redistricting Wars

Kelly Ward is determined not to bang her head, politically, against the wall. She spent four years running the Democrats' House Campaign Committee where, thanks to the Republicans' prodigious gerrymandering of congressional districts, she made little progress.
Convinced that under the current structure Democrats have little chance to win a majority in the House, party heavyweights, including former President Barack Obama, have launched the National Democratic Redistricting Committee (NDRC) with Ward as executive director. Working with other party organizations, the group is targeting governor's and state legislative races in 2018 and 2020 with the ultimate aim of making Democrats competitive in the next redistricting after the 2020 census.
In most states, the legislature, often subject to the governor's approval, sets boundaries for state legislative and congressional districts. After losing the presidency in 2008, Republicans did this with spectacular success: they now hold 29 governorships and control legislatures in two dozens states with 800 more lawmakers than eight years ago. The House of Representatives added 63 more Republicans as well.
Population patterns -- Democrats tend to live in dense counties -- and the natural appeal of the opposition party were factors. But, Ward notes, redistricting played a decisive role. "They've cheated their way to power," Ward charges.
Turning things around will take longer than one election cycle, of course. But it starts in some of the biggest battlegrounds in the nation. While Democrats can't even begin to hope for winning majorities in the state legislatures of Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Ohio, all four states are choosing governors in 2018 -- and Virginia's will be chosen next fall. That's where Ward plans to focus her group's energy and resources.
Democrats will continue mounting legal challenges, which have won several seats when courts determined redistricting plans were racially biased or otherwise flawed.
Republicans, however, are skeptical Democrats will do much better this cycle, saying they've simply outsmarted and outworked their rivals.
If the Democrats fall short, it won't be for lack of urgency. Former Attorney Eric Holder joined the NDRC as chair after serving as one of Obama's most trusted lieutenants. "The Democrats took our eye off the ball; we didn't realize the importance of redistricting," he said. Now, grassroots activists are energized, donors are coming through, and Obama has committed to speak out and raise money, Holder added.
The former president owes it to the party. While he enjoyed policy successes and left office riding a wave of popularity, he neglected party building for years.
After 2008, Republicans brought a new level of skill, sophistication and sleaze to the redistricting effort. In a half-dozen important states, mapping mavens wielding demographics and data redrew districts, making it almost impossible for Democrats.
In the inelegantly titled Ratf--cked, David Daley interviewed the architects of this legitimate skullduggery.
In Pennsylvania, he reports, one district is so contorted it resembles Disney figures -- "Donald Duck kicking Goofy." One residence's front yard is in a different district than the backyard. In a state that narrowly went for Trump after going decisively for Obama four years before, Republicans control 13 of the 18 House seats and dominate the state legislature.
The four large Philadelphia suburbs vote decisively Democratic. Yet they are represented by three Republicans. There are similar pattern in Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin and North Carolina. All due to shrewd redistricting.
Thanks to court rulings that unleashed a torrent of special interest money on politics, Republicans poured millions, much of it secretive or unreported, into these redistricting efforts.
They also got down and dirty in state legislative races that usually receive less attention. A Pennsylvania state Senator was accused, falsely, of sticking taxpayers with a $600 million library. Daley notes resurgent North Carolina Republicans, perhaps the most amoral political party in the country, played the ugly race card in one contest and likened a Democratic legislator to a prostitute in another.
Winning these state races set the terms for congressional redistricting done with equal efficiency. It's estimated Democrats would have to win the overall vote for House candidates by six or seven points to eke out a narrow majority.
This has governing, as well as political, ramifications. These safe districts -- on both sides -- produce politicians less willing to seek consensus or compromise. That deepening congressional dysfunction was a constant strain on Obama's presidency -- and may hit Trump now. For example, the political consideration for most of the conservative members now threatening to vote against the Republican replacement of Obamacare, charging it's too liberal, is a primary challenge from the right.
It's not that Democrats are more noble when it comes to redistricting; when in power, they gerrymandered too. They just haven't had as much power or as much skill. That's why the best approach to resetting the grand chessboard of American politics is a bipartisan commission. Such panels have worked well in a handful of states like Arizona and California.
For now, Eric Holder and Kelly Ward vow Democrats are waking up and won't be blindsided this time. "My role is to make redistricting sexy," said Holder.


The G-20 Is a (Slightly Dysfunctional) Family

Next week’s meeting of G-20 finance ministers and central bank governors in Germany hasn’t yet begun, but the conflicts have already started. Observers expect a heated debate about trade at the first meeting attended by representatives of the Trump administration: Trump’s trade adviser and the German finance minister have already gotten into a spat, and a draft communique obtained by Reuters suggests the G-20 may stop explicitly rejecting competitive currency devaluations and protectionism.
Given the way the media presents the G-20 as an arena for conflict, the Trump administration can hardly be blamed for viewing the summit as a venue for competition among countries. But both the press and the administration are wrong.
When I served as Treasury spokesperson for international affairs in the Obama administration, I learned that discussions at the G-20 often aren’t zero-sum. G-20 finance ministers all share the same goal: global growth. But domestic economic reform is often extraordinarily painful and unpopular. It would be so much easier for each country if they could instead get other countries to put their own economies in order, and then enjoy the stronger global economy that would result. So, that’s often what they try to do.
The conflict that ensues at these meetings isn’t surprising. But the fact that countries often encourage other nations to implement reforms that would leave them stronger over the long run while trying to avoid reform themselves -- in other words, so that they can stay weaker -- really is. Save for maybe satellite states, it’s the opposite of what most mainstream international relations theories would predict.
Luckily, however, I grew up in a family -- the perfect model for understanding the G-20. Each ministerial (diplomatic-speak for a meeting of ministers) begins with a family photo, followed by negotiations. The negotiations are like a holiday dinner, sans turkey. Participants are expected to engage in civil discussion. This doesn’t always happen. But, like a biological family, there’s no alternative to dealing with these people. The G-20 has no exit mechanism.
A family also tries to socialize behavior. Just as my mom taught my siblings and me to ask to be excused before leaving the dinner table, the U.S. uses these discussions to try to promote its preferred norms, such as refraining from currency manipulation.
Above all, the G-20 is like a family because everyone tells each other what they should be doing. While self-interest is invariably involved, the recommendations -- such as reducing debt or strengthening regulation of financial markets -- are also usually motivated by a genuine desire to see other economies grow healthier and stronger. For example, the G-20 has for years been encouraging European members to act more forcefully to address the euro zone’s debt crisis. Given the presence of U.S. rivals like China, who are approached very differently in other forums, this is truly remarkable.
However, the absence of underlying conflict doesn’t make for a great story. So, reporters covering the summit look for a different angle. When I worked for the Treasury, nothing could strike greater fear into the hearts of my colleagues than the prospect of the U.S. being branded as a loser in international negotiations -- and American weakness abroad headlining the next day’s papers. To avoid this, preparation for each meeting of G-20 finance ministers began with a brainstorming session on what “shiny object” we could come up with for reporters to cover. No idea was too crazy for consideration. When Mexico began hosting the meetings in 2012 and we learned that the Secret Service would be sending a counter-assault team with us for extra security, a senior official joked how helpful a kidnapping attempt at the meeting could be -- provided, of course, that no one got hurt.
But just as the media often misses the real story at G-20 meetings, the Trump administration would be wrong to create conflicts by pursuing protectionist policies. That’s because the U.S. relies on the strength of major trading partners like China and Europe, which it needs to purchase American goods and buoy the global economy. As Kenneth Rapoza recently noted in Forbes, “For generations, the global influence of the U.S. was captured by the old adage that ‘when America sneezes, the world catches a cold.’ Today, those symptoms now appear when China does the same.”
The best way for the Trump administration to view the other members of the G-20 is as family, not foes. Too bad that’s not eye-catching enough for an A1 headline.


Health-Care Politics Now Favors the Democrats

Not everyone hates Paul Ryan’s new health-care bill. Sure, conservative policy wonks, pretty much across the board, hate it. Right-wing agitators like Heritage Action hate it. Donor tax-cut advocates like the Club for Growth hate it. And conservative purists -- that courageous breed that eschews tainted compromise with dull reality -- hate it.
Naturally, liberals hate it, as do people with serious health problems who depend on reliable health insurance.
Yet a Democratic leadership aide was far less unkind. Asked purely about the bill’s political merits, he said Democrats, policy consequences aside, would be delighted to see Republican House members casting votes in favor of it, which he likened to walking a plank.
Former Democratic strategist Robert Shrum similarly envisions Republicans dropping into the abyss. "If you were cynical, and all you cared about was the political calculus, you’d want this misshapen monstrosity to pass,” he said in a telephone interview. Democratic pollster Paul Maslin emailed: "Probably better for us if it passes. Unfortunately the right wing knows that too and they may kill it for that reason.”
Obamacare repeal was originally supposed to be the first of two tax cuts for the wealthy. Phase I would knock out the tax revenue that funds the Affordable Care Act. In Phase II, Republicans would not only deliver another round of tax cuts to the wealthy, they would have that legislation scored against the revised, more favorable, baseline produced by Phase I. Depletions to the treasury caused by Phase I would make the revenue lost to high-end tax cuts in Phase II appear less onerous.
That may yet come to pass. But the one-two punch depends on Republican leaders rallying support for a bill for which they can’t relate the most basic details: How many people will lose health insurance? How much will their misfortune cost the U.S. Treasury? GOP leaders want to begin moving the legislation before the Congressional Budget Office can finish analyzing it.
If Republicans can’t pass a repeal bill after dozens of symbolic votes against Obamacare, and after years of raging against the law, it not only casts a pall over the joyous act of cutting taxes in Phase II, it raises an existential question about the GOP itself: Beyond tax cuts, what’s it good for?
If the new repeal legislation “goes down in flames,” emailed another Democrat, pollster Anna Greenberg, “it could depress GOP turnout in the midterms.” Either the final bill will please the right-wing purists in the House Freedom Caucus, Greenberg said, in which case some Republicans who support the bill will face primaries from their right, or many Trump voters will lose their health insurance. “Either way,” she said, “nothing good comes from this effort.”
Democratic schadenfreude is not quite the same as Democratic power. The party has been hapless in off-year elections; both 2010 and 2014 were devastating, transferring hundreds of seats in the House, Senate, state legislatures and governor’s offices from Democratic to Republican control. But the election of Trump has galvanized the liberal grassroots. They have been screaming, Tea-Party-like, at their representatives in town halls across the country. Democrats aren’t just the out party now, which typically gains in midterm elections. Like Republicans circa 2010, they’re the outraged party.
“Democrats are going to crawl across broken glass on their knees to go vote in 2018, if the conditions exist as they do today,” said Democratic Governor Jay Inslee of Washington in an interview Feb. 27 with the Washington Post.
Democratic fury is not an immediate concern of Speaker Ryan. More pressing is the state of his majority, which is prone to fray at both the extreme and moderate ends. The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, has a similar problem and, presuming no Democratic support, has only two wayward votes to spare.
The prospect of betraying white working-class voters, many of whom benefit from Obamacare whether they know it or not, doesn’t seem to weigh on the GOP congressional leadership. But it might bother the White House. Trump promised to replace Obamacare with something “terrific.”
“I’m proud to support the replacement plan released by the House of Representatives,” Trump said Tuesday after meeting with House Republicans at the White House.
But the legislation will hurt millions and transform their health-care subsidies into tax benefits for the richest. Trump may be fine with that in theory, but the buck in this administration never stops anywhere near the Oval Office. If the repeal bill ends up looking like a loser -- and it’s got a hangdog look already -- who thinks Brave Sir Robin of the Round Office will buckle down, take the heat and work to pass it?
Republicans will face hell from their base if they fail to repeal Obamacare. But parts of that base will suffer if the effort succeeds. Perhaps the most fitting coda of this shameless period of American history would be Trump and other Republicans saving lives by killing their own cynical, misbegotten deed.


Truman's War on Pentagon Waste

In his address to Congress Tuesday, Donald Trump pledged to eliminate the so-called “defense sequester,” a statutory limit on defense spending enacted in 2011, so that a $54 billion increase for the Pentagon would be possible. But that would require devastating cuts to other parts of the federal government, steep increases to the federal deficit, or both.
What if there was a way that Trump could get what that military bump without spending one more dime of taxpayer money? And what if this involved collaborating with Congress so that both sides could claim victory over big government?
This is not at all far-fetched; in fact, there’s a shining example to follow in U.S. history books. It was called the Truman Committee, and it offers a timely reminder that there are ways of getting things done in Washington that can redound to virtually everyone’s benefit -- save, perhaps, for military contractors accustomed to spending like drunken sailors.
In 1940, Harry S. Truman was the junior senator from Missouri. Fresh off a narrow re-election victory and without much of a reputation beyond his home state, no one would have said the Democrat was made of presidential material at this point in his career. But that year gave him an opportunity when Congress approved a massive increase in military spending to counter threats from abroad that would ultimately result in World War II.
Truman’s office began receiving now-familiar complaints about wasteful spending, pay-to-play contracts, and other signs of corruption. So he decided to investigate these claims -- personally. He got into his Dodge and hit the road, traveling thousands of miles to survey military installations throughout the country.
He came away with a conviction that corruption and waste were rampant, and had the evidence to back it up. Workers paid full wages for doing nothing; valuable building supplies left to spoil in the winter weather; and contracts given to unqualified, inexperienced suppliers. Enraged, Truman took to the floor of the Senate and delivered the speech that arguably launched him to political greatness.
Truman traced the ways that large contracts had been awarded to companies on the basis of personal connections. Though he was willing to concede “friendship should not be a handicap to anyone seeking work in the War Department,” he expressed concern about what was driving the choice of contractors. “When a friendship … dominates the selection of an inferior contractor, then that selection is wrong.”
At the end of his speech, he proposed that the Senate create a “special committee” to examine all the contracts given out under the new dispensation in order to “find out if the rumors rife in this city have any foundation in fact.” But Truman made it clear he was skeptical: “I have never found a contractor who, if not watched, would not leave the government holding the bag.”
Truman asked the Senate to vote on a resolution creating the Senate Special Committee to Investigate the National Defense Program. It passed unanimously, and Truman was installed at its head. Yet few senators expected the effort to succeed with its paltry budget of $15,000.
But Truman proved remarkably resourceful, promoting his investigation on radio and urging the public to help. His office was soon flooded with tips, which led to high-profile exposés, which created more media coverage, more tips, and more scrutiny. Truman was on a roll, and the Senate beefed up his budget. Twenty people were eventually hired.
Rather than make this a single-party issue, Truman managed to forge a bipartisan consensus within his committee that produced unanimous reports. Powerful defense contractors, called to testify, squirmed as they tried to account for inexplicable cost overruns, faulty and life-endangering products, and other malfeasance. But he also put labor leaders in the hot seat, too.
After the U.S. entered the war, the Roosevelt administration demanded the committee’s disbandment. Truman stood firm, arguing that it was “needed more than ever to ensure an efficient war effort.” He prevailed. In the process, he also revived the flagging reputation of Congress, turning it into an effective counterweight after years of rubber stamping New Deal programs for FDR.
The committee’s revelations had a salutary effect, forcing defense contractors to assume that they could be called to account for every penny given them. Truman shrewdly framed this in patriotic terms. “When people create delays for profit, when they sell poor products for defense use, when they cheat on price and quality," he declared, "they aren't any different from a draft dodger.”
Truman's remarkable balancing act blended populism, patriotism, and hard-nosed accounting. But Americans who yearned for leadership from Congress loved it, even as he taunted the military brass. “No military man knows anything about money," he said. "All they know to do is spend it.”
As Truman’s stock climbed, Roosevelt took notice, notwithstanding his earlier objections to the committee’s work. What began as a road trip in 1940 led to Truman’s nomination and election as vice president, and in 1945, to Truman becoming president upon FDR’s passing.
But the lasting contributions of the Truman Committee can be measured in blood and treasure. Over Truman’s four-year tenure, the Committee ran up bills totaling just under a million dollars. But it is estimated to have saved thousands of lives, thanks to in its endless investigations into everything from aircraft engines to landing craft.
More quantifiable was its effects on the bottom line. By some estimates, the Truman Committee saved approximately $15 billion ($230 billion in today’s money) by 1944; it amassed additional savings until it was disbanded in 1948.
Along the way, Congress learned how to stand up to a rather autocratic president, and restored American faith in the power of government to spend taxpayer money prudently. In our own post-9/11 era of massive defense increases, perhaps the president -- who prides himself on driving a hard bargain -- should partner with Congress and find himself a latter-day Harry Truman who could cut the fat from the military’s budget before writing yet another blank check.


Trump, Russia and a Watergate Veteran's Deja Vu

Here are two cardinal Washington rules. When a politician declares that something is "much ado about nothing," it's about something. And when politicians lie, it's because they're trying to hide something.
This brings us to the Trump-Russia connection, which President Donald Trump charges has been distorted by "fake news" manipulators conducting a political witch hunt. It's neither; it's raised serious issues that will cast a shadow over his presidency for the foreseeable future.
"If there is nothing there, nothing to hide, you open the doors and invite them in," says John Dean, of Watergate fame. "When you start seeing a big pushback and blaming it all on the media, you know there's something there."
Dean, who has followed Trump-Russia revelations closely, brings unique insight. He was President Richard Nixon's White House counsel as the Watergate scandal began to break in 1973, and he helped mastermind the coverup that ultimately brought Nixon down. He later pleaded guilty to obstructing justice and was a witness against some of the Nixon aides who were convicted in federal conspiracy trials.
Dean and other Watergate veterans have a sense of deja vu watching the Trump White House dissembling, enlisting accommodating Republicans to knock down credible stories and reacting to a drip, drip, drip of revelations.
Last week came more reports of contacts between Russian officials and Trump backers, along with the news that Attorney General Jeff Sessions met privately with the Russian ambassador in September and denied it during his confirmation hearing. Thus Sessions became the third Trump insider to be caught in evasions about Russia connections, after former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn and campaign foreign-policy adviser Carter Page.
On Thursday, Sessions removed himself from any investigation of charges that Russia tried to sway the presidential election.
When Dean heard Republican Intelligence Committee Chair Devin Nunes declare recently that there's "no evidence" of wrongdoing, he says he thought of Hugh Scott. Scott was the Senate Republican leader who in 1973 repeatedly said he'd spoken to the White House and concluded that Watergate was much ado about little.
U.S. intelligence agencies have already concluded that Russians were behind the hacking of emails from accounts of the Democratic National Committee and Hillary Clinton's campaign chairman, John Podesta, and that Russia gave the emails to WikiLeaks for dissemination of embarrassing particulars. In a public report, the intelligence agencies concluded that President Vladimir Putin directed the "influence campaign" to help Trump.
That much is already clear. What's at issue is whether this was done in collusion with Trump operatives, something that might raise questions about criminality and the validity of the election result. Trump and his team vehemently deny this. Numerous news reports, citing intelligence sources, say there's clear proof of multiple contacts though not of active coordination.
In contrast to ham-handed past episodes of Russian cyber hacking, last year's interventions showed a nuanced understanding of U.S. politics. An example: On the eve of the Democratic National Convention in July, leaks surfaced showing that the party chair tried to tilt the nominating process against the insurgent challenger, Senator Bernie Sanders, infuriating his followers. The timing was exquisite and the impact strong.
Then there's Oct. 7. That was the day that 17 U.S. intelligence agencies released a joint statement saying that the Russian government directed the theft of emails connected to the election. It was also the day when a videotape appeared in which Trump was caught making coarse boasts about groping women.
WikiLeaks, which usually released its material during morning hours, made an exception that day by posting private remarks that Clinton once made to Goldman Sachs executives just a few hours after the lewd video emerged.
Political pressure to investigate the connections is building. Republican lawmakers were pressed during the congressional recess last month to pursue formal probes. There's a chance that the Senate Intelligence Committee will do so because of prodding by the senior committee Democrat, Mark Warner of Virginia, and a few Republicans led by John McCain of Arizona.
Dean thinks there should be both a congressional inquiry and a law-enforcement investigation led by a special counsel.
"These investigations need something to feed it," Dean said."The press can't crack this by itself, but if there are real investigations, there will be leaks."
Trump, he added, "is right on this: his problem is leaks."


Did Sessions Commit Perjury? Let's Talk It Out

Attorney General Jeff Sessions is the center of Washington’s scandal-du-jour. The allegation: Sessions lied to Congress about contacts with Russia, which feeds into worries that the Trump campaign was somehow in bed with Vladimir Putin, and may even have had something to do with the hacking of the Democratic National Committee.
At issue are two meetings that Sessions had with Russian ambassador Sergey Kislyak while the campaign was going on -- and while Sessions was a senior member of the Senate Armed Services Committee. Sessions says that he routinely met with ambassadors from many nations as part of his Senate duties, and that nothing happened. Democrats say that it’s suspicious -- and that the fact that he lied to Congress about them makes those meetings more suspicious still.
After perusing these alleged “lies,” I don’t think Democrats have the slam-dunk case that many on social media were claiming this morning. Mostly, the “lies” seem to come down to the difference between written and oral language.
To see what I mean, consider the substance of these two alleged falsehoods. The first came during Sessions's confirmation hearing, when he had the following exchange with Senator Al Franken:
FRANKEN: CNN just published a story alleging that the intelligence community provided documents to the president-elect last week, that included information that “Russian operatives claim to have compromising personal and financial information about Mr. Trump.” These documents also allegedly say “there was a continuing exchange of information during the campaign between Trump surrogates and intermediaries for the Russian government.” Again, I’m telling you this as it’s coming out, so, you know.
But if it’s true, it’s obviously extremely serious, and if there is any evidence that anyone affiliated with the Trump campaign communicated with the Russian government in the course of this campaign, what will you do?
SESSIONS: Senator Franken, I’m not aware of any of those activities. I have been called a surrogate at a time or two in that campaign and I did not have communications with the Russians, and I’m unable to comment on it.
FRANKEN: Very well.
The second was a written response to a letter from Senator Patrick Leahy:
LEAHY: Several of the President-Elect’s nominees or senior advisers have Russian ties. Have you been in contact with anyone connected to any part of the Russian government about the 2016 election, either before or after Election Day?
SESSIONS: No.
Now, I don’t know whether Sessions has been in contact with Russian officials or not about the election; neither the senator nor Kislyak have chosen to confide this information to me. But let’s assume for the nonce that he wasn’t. Was his response to Patrick Leahy’s letter reasonable? Eminently. It is reasonable even if, in the course of a meeting on some other topic, the ambassador idly asked how the campaign was going.
Sessions was an early Trump surrogate, and it would have been unsurprising for the ambassador to ask about the race in passing; if Sessions then replied with campaign boilerplate little different from what he was saying in public, that is not, by any stretch of the imagination, a meaningful contact with a foreign power. Anyone at the Kremlin could have gotten the same information by turning on CNN.
But what about the exchange with Franken? This was what really seemed to seize the imaginations of Twitter this morning, where cries of “perjury” were flying left and right. Well, OK, mostly left, actually. I don’t think, however, that those charges are going to stick.
Franken offered a lengthy preamble suggesting that the Trump campaign had been exchanging information with the Russians, then asked him what he’d do if there was information that someone in the Trump campaign had communicated with the Russians. In the time-honored tradition of congressional hearings, Sessions said he hadn’t had any such communications, had no knowledge of such communications, and therefore wouldn’t speculate about the hypothetical.
If you read the latter part of this exchange extremely strictly, chopping off the preamble, then you can argue that Sessions was technically untruthful. The problem is that this is not how verbal communication works. The left is attempting to hold the attorney general to a standard of precision that is appropriate for written communication, where we can reflect on preceding context and choose exactly the right word.
Oral language is much looser, because it’s real time. Real time means that we don’t have 20 minutes to puzzle over the exact phrasing that will best communicate our meaning. (For example: Reading this column aloud will take you perhaps five minutes. It took me nearly that many hours to write.) On the other hand, our audience is right there, and can ask for clarification if they are confused.
Demanding extreme clarity from an oral exchange is unreasonable. Moreover, everyone understands that this is unreasonable -- except, possibly, for the chattering classes, who spend their lives so thoroughly marinated in the written word that they come to think that the two spheres are supposed to be identical. Most ordinary people understand very well that there’s a big difference between talking and writing (which is why most people, even those who are dazzling in conversation, have a hard time producing fluid and lively prose).
That’s not to say that it’s wrong to investigate the Trump administration’s ties to Russia. Investigate away! If the Trump campaign knew about, or colluded with, the hack on the DNC, then Trump should be impeached. But at the moment, we have no evidence that Sessions committed a crime, much less attempted to cover it up. The court of public opinion is probably going to require somewhat better facts to convict.


Putin Invented This Toxic Ambassador Game

As a new Russia-related scandal sweeps Washington, it's impossible not to recall President Vladimir Putin's efforts in 2012 to make meetings with the U.S. ambassador to Moscow toxic. As Trump's opponents seek to inflict maximum damage for Attorney General Jeff Sessions' false denial about a meeting with a Russian envoy, they should understand where these games lead.
For Putin, whose suspicion of foreign diplomats was nurtured during his years as an intelligence officer, it began in 2007. "Unfortunately, there are still those in our country who scavenge at foreign embassies, counting on the support of foreign foundations and governments rather than the support of their own people," Putin famously told a rally of his supporters in 2007. The word Putin used for "scavenge" -- shakalit' -- is derived from the Russian for "jackal."
Still, Putin didn't really make it difficult for Russians to seek out foreigners for financial support or attend embassy receptions to network until the beginning of his third presidential term in 2012. After mass protests against a rigged parliamentary election in 2011, Putin became convinced that the U.S. had just attempted regime change in Russia, so he moved against what he saw as pernicious U.S. influence. It was in 2012 that Russia booted out the U.S. Agency for International Development for meddling in Russia's domestic affairs for "attempts to influence political processes through its grants," according to the Russian Foreign Ministry. A sustained campaign began against foreign-funded non-profit organizations, culminating in the passage of Russia's infamous law on non-governmental organizations which obliged groups that conducted "political activities" to register as "foreign agents" if they received any overseas grants.
It was also in 2012 that Michael McFaul, newly arrived in Moscow as U.S. ambassador, held his first official meeting after visiting the foreign ministry to present credentials. The meeting was with well-known anti-Putin opposition figures, including Boris Nemtsov, who would later be murdered not far from the Kremlin. The 2011 protests came up during the discussion.
McFaul, a Stanford academic who had spent years in Moscow, likely didn't attach much practical significance to the symbolic meeting. Putin's people thought otherwise. Throughout that year, reporters from NTV, a state-owned, pro-Kremlin TV channel, hounded him every time he tried to meet with an opposition figure -- or, indeed, go almost anywhere in Moscow, though they never said how they knew his schedule. McFaul complained about the harassment, as did the U.S. government.
The Kremlin's signal was clear: even meeting with McFaul was tantamount to flirting with the enemy. This led to a poignant Twitter exchange between McFaul and Alexei Navalny, who is still the most popular Putin opponent in Russia.
"We should meet someday," McFaul tweeted to Navalny in English. "Odd that everyone thinks we hang out every night when in fact we have never since I came to Moscow."
Navalny responded in Russian: "OK, let's meet at Komsomolskaya subway station, in the middle of the platform. I'll carry a copy of the Ogonyok magazine, and I'll recognize you by the American flag you'll carry."
"I get it," McFaul tweeted back in Russian.
Just as Putin did in 2012, Trump's critics in Congress and in the media are turning Russian representatives in the U.S. into pariahs -- even without intending to. And without evidence of wrongdoing so far. Even former national security adviser Michael Flynn, a Russia dove, apparently didn't talk about anything reprehensible with Russian envoy to Washington Sergey Kislyak. Sessions, a senator at the time and a Russia hawk, met with lots of other ambassadors, too. The most obvious problem with meeting Kislyak -- in Sessions' Senate office no less -- is that he is perceived as toxic in Washington as Putin's representative.
How far can the stigma stretch? Do businesses have to worry that seeking Russian funding for projects will magically transform them into Russian agents? Will any person that could be described as a Putin regime associate automatically become suspect? Should they all be surveilled, with leaked transcripts of contacts with Americans spilling out into the media at politically opportune times?
The smarter alternative is to leave Kislyak alone. It's his job to have lots of polite and often pointless meetings. If Russia did influence the U.S. election, it can't have been through him -- he's too visible, and his communications are clearly subject to intelligence monitoring. He's as guilty of attempting regime change in the U.S. as McFaul was of trying to have Putin overthrown. A witch hunt involving everyone he's met in the Trump camp is not a good way to show U.S. moral superiority to the Putin regime.


The Resistance Will Have All the Proper Permits

The U.S. has started becoming a country of protesters once again, largely in response to the proposed policies and rhetoric of President Donald Trump. In response, citing the ostensible grounds of disorderliness and manipulation, Republican lawmakers have introduced bills to curb protesting in at least 17 states, with possibly more to come. I don’t approve, and if you don’t either I have a sorry message for you: This trend has been the bipartisan thrust of American policy since the 1970s.
For decades, we’ve restricted protests to protect safety and public order, but an important part of our democracy has eroded, namely the constitutional right to public assembly. I outline this history in one chapter of my new book, “The Complacent Class: The Self-Defeating Quest for the American Dream”; it is just one of many examples of how Americans are giving up their former dynamism for greater security, and to the possible long-run detriment of society.
These days, there exists a mini-industry of “protest planners,” comparable to wedding or convention planners. They will help you coordinate with the police, set up stages and sound systems in the approved manner, and clean up after the event. A major protest is a bureaucratized event, accompanied by professional teams of public relations and media management. The right to assembly has not been banished; it’s simply been limited, and made more difficult and expensive. At the margin that will limit the number and diversity of protests.
To understand how we got to this point, consider the chaos of public protests from the 1960s and early 1970s. The 1968 to 1975 period saw more instances of anti-government violence than any time since the American Civil War, and eventually state and local governments decided that they would regulate protests more closely.
Take the famed Selma civil-rights marchers of 1965, when the protesters had obtained the legal right, through petition, to conduct a 52-mile, five-day march down an interstate highway. Of course, that blocked the highway and inconvenienced many motorists and truckers. America’s NIMBY mentality would most likely prevent a comparable event today.
Starting in the 1970s, the federal courts began to assert that public spaces are not automatically fair game for marches and demonstrations, and so local governments have sought to please the users of such facilities rather than marchers and protesters. For instance, during the 2004 Democratic National Convention, numerous would-be demonstrators ended up being confined to a “demonstration zone,” which one federal judge described as analogous to Piranesi’s etchings of a prison. The zone was ringed by barricades, fences and coiled razor wire.
Or take the Occupy Wall Street movement in 2011, which was in large part defanged by the authorities of the city of New York. Rather than opting for outright confrontation, and perhaps some publicity victories for the protesters, authorities waited for the winter to shut down the encampment. The city police also surrounded the main protest site, Zuccotti Park, with their cars and set up a watchtower to keep a vigil. Barricades were placed to keep pedestrians away from the site, and passers-by were encouraged to “keep moving.”
Washington is in some ways more restrictive yet. The National Park Service controls about 25 percent of the city, including many of the focal spots. If a protest is expected to be of any note, the organizers will be required to meet with the Park Police and possibly the Capitol Police to plan it out, accompanied by lawyers in many cases. Further complications arise if the Secret Service is involved, and virtually any protest can be stifled or shut down altogether by invoking national security or terrorism fears.
Universities have changed a great deal, too. After the invasion of Cambodia and the shootings at Kent State University in May 1970, almost 4 million students demonstrated and 536 schools shut down, with protests erupting on more than 1,250 campuses. During that single month of May, there were 95 instances of bombings and arson on college campuses alone, and 30 ROTC buildings were burned or bombed. Today, a campus protest is very often about demands for safe spaces rather than political revolution. That shift makes for a much more pleasant and productive campus life, but there are lingering suspicions that millennial students do not (yet?) understand the urgency of the times they live in.
The excesses of the 1960s and ’70s are familiar, and the increasingly peaceful nature of American society has benefited virtually all of us. Still, I can’t help but wonder what has been lost. Surely there is a happy medium. Because American crime has come down, most likely the violence of protests would have fallen, too. Could we not have kept public demonstrations and protests more alive as a vital and nonbureaucratized tradition?
For a long time, most people ignored this issue, but I wonder if it won’t start to seem urgent once again.


Geert Wilders Doesn't Want to Govern

The latest polling averages in the Netherlands project that anti-Islam, anti-European Union populist Geert Wilders’s Freedom Party will get 22 to 26 seats in the next Dutch parliament.
They could be wrong. Maybe people are embarrassed to admit to pollsters that they’re voting for Wilders, and he’ll really get 30 seats, or even 35.
Still, it’s important to keep a couple of things in mind:
Even if the Freedom Party confounds all expectations and gets 35 seats, that still leaves 115 seats that it won’t control -- and Wilders is on such poor terms with all the other Dutch political leaders that he probably won’t be able to influence them much, either (more on that later).
If the Freedom Party comes in at the high end of the current projections and gets 26 seats, it will merely equal the total achieved in 2002 by another anti-Islam, euroskeptic populist party, the Pim Fortuyn List.
That 2002 result came under dramatic circumstances. Fortuyn, an irrepressibly outspoken former sociology professor, was assassinated nine days before the election by a Dutch environmental activist. Afterwards, his party formed a government along with the centrist Christian Democrats and the center-right People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy, or VVD, but it didn’t last -- in part because with Fortuyn gone his top lieutenants couldn’t get along with one another.
A new election was held in 2003, and the Pim Fortuyn List fell to just eight seats. In 2006 that dropped to zero. But the populist tendency didn't go away.
I've included the left-wing Socialist Party in this chart because it too has espoused nationalist, euroskeptic and even anti-Islam views, although it has moderated its rhetoric in recent years. The traditional social-democratic party in the Netherlands is Labour, aka PvdA; the Socialist Party is a former Maoist splinter group that first entered parliament in 1994. In 2006 it took the protest-vote lead with 25 seats. Meanwhile, former VVDer Wilders had formed the Freedom Party, which combined anti-Islam rhetoric with pretty conventional right-wing economic policy and won nine seats in the Dutch lower house.
By 2010 Wilders had begun shifting to a more nationalist-populist approach, and his party won 24 seats. The Freedom Party subsequently agreed to support a minority government formed by the VVD and Christian Democrats, but after less than two years Wilders's failure to come through on that support caused the cabinet to fall. In the subsequent 2012 election the Freedom Party lost ground, falling to 15 seats.
I have subjected you to all these numbers because I think they provide some helpful context for understanding and maybe tempering the excitement and consternation about Wilders and the supposed Dutch turn to populism. That turn is real, but it happened 15 years ago, and so far it has been limited to about a quarter of the Dutch electorate.
Wilders appears to have learned from his and other Dutch populists' experience that modulating one's views and playing a role in governing the country loses votes. As Arjen Lubach, the Dutch television host now known worldwide for his “America first, Netherlands second” video, the Freedom Party’s platform has become less detailed and less realistic with each passing year; key planks this time around include closing all mosques in the Netherlands and banning the Koran.
In 2012 Wilders still participated in the policy-heavy rituals of Dutch elections, such as the economic scorecard of party platforms that I wrote about last month. This year he hasn't. He's found excuses to pull out of the first two television debates, and he has even stopped making campaign appearances after revelations last week of less-than-careful behavior by some of the policemen assigned to his security detail. The latter move may have been made out of legitimate safety concerns, but in general I think it's fair to say that Wilders is deliberately following a campaign strategy of pure anti-establishment symbolism, untempered by concerns about how his behavior will play with the other political parties or how any of his statements might translate into actual government policy.
This may get him a few more seats in parliament, and it is certainly getting him lots of international attention. It's awfully hard to see, though, how it could translate into political power. It is quite possible that Wilders's Freedom Party will be the largest party in the next parliament, but if so it will probably be the smallest largest party since parliament was expanded to 150 seats in 1956 (the current record is held by the VVD, which was the biggest party with just 31 seats after the 2010 election). And with Wilders having burned his bridges with every other party by his unreliability between 2010 and 2012 and his increasing withdrawal from reasoned political discourse since, there is virtually no chance that he will be part of whatever government is formed.
As my colleague Leonid Bershidsky wrote last week, Wilders represents the real concerns and fears of lots of his countrymen about immigration and Dutch identity. But while his approach may have played a role in shifting the stances of other parties in a less immigrant-friendly direction, in general it seems to have become a political dead end. In an interview this week, former VVD Minister for Integration and Immigration Rita Verdonk -- who tried forming her own nationalist-populist party (Proud of the Netherlands) a few years ago without much success -- went from calling Donald Trump a "breath of fresh air" to urging Wilders to step down from party leadership soon after the election:
The opposition to Geert is gigantic. No one in The Hague will have anything to do with him. It would be sensible for him to go away and put someone else forward. I don't have any names, mind you, but Geert undoubtedly has his eye on someone.
That sure seems unlikely -- Wilders has structured the Freedom Party so that he is the party's only member, and no one else has any formal say. But it might at least make it possible for Wilders's many supporters to have a say in how their country is run.


The Hurdle for Huntsman at State: Trump's Loyalty Test

On the surface Jon Huntsman appears to be a safe pick to be President Donald Trump's deputy secretary of state. He is a popular former governor from Utah, whom Barack Obama named the ambassador to China. In an era of hyperpartisanship, Huntsman has cultivated a reputation as a centrist, and he enjoys bipartisan support. So it makes sense, as the Wall Street Journal reported this week, that Huntsman is being considered for the job by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson.
At least it makes sense at first. But Huntsman may not pass the Trump loyalty test. After tapes emerged in October that caught Trump on tape boasting of groping women, Huntsman called on him to drop out of the race. That's important considering the fate of Elliott Abrams, a former Reagan and Bush administration official who had passed his final interview with Tillerson, only to be vetoed by Trump. Abrams had criticized Trump during the campaign.
Then there is the issue of his family's business, the Huntsman Corporation, a chemical manufacturer that does business all over the world. Trump campaigned on the promise to bring back jobs from overseas. He has proposed a 35 percent tariff on American companies that move jobs abroad. Huntsman's family business has moved many jobs to places like India and China.
Over 1,000 of its 12,000 employees in 2011 were in China, according to Bloomberg Businessweek. That's another potential area where Huntsman and Trump will clash. The president has been a persistent foe of China, and has accused the country of stealing U.S. jobs and manipulating its currency at the expense of other nations. Huntsman has a long history of trying to enhance ties with Beijing and supporting permanent normal trade relations with China.
While many chemical companies have seen a surge in their business in China in recent years, the Huntsman Corporation did particularly well when Huntsman served as Obama's ambassador in Beijing. According to Businessweek, the Huntsman Corporation's revenue increased by 57 percent in this period in 2009 and 2010.
If Huntsman were nominated to be deputy secretary of state, he would have to unravel his ties to his family's business. After his failed presidential run in 2012, Huntsman rejoined the board of the Huntsman Corporation. He resigned from it in August 2015, but his father, Jon Huntsman Sr., remains the executive chairman of the board, and his brother Peter is the CEO. The Huntsman family still owns a 20 percent stake in the company, and as of February 2015, Jon Huntsman Jr. still owned stock in it.
In an Aug. 6, 2015, letter to the board of directors, Huntsman wrote that he would still be working with the company. "I feel we have constructed, for your consideration, an ongoing relationship that would maximize my personal involvement and most importantly benefit the shareholders and associates of Huntsman Corporation," he wrote. "A requirement of achieving this would be resigning as a member of the board of directors, which I hereby tender."
Under the Trump administration's ethics rules, Huntsman would at the very least have to recuse himself from any official business that touched the Huntsman Corporation for two years following his resignation from the board. But his resignation letter suggests he has maintained a relationship since then, in which case further recusals might be required.
Norm Eisen, who served as Obama's special counsel for ethics and government reform, told me he believes Huntsman would be an "outstanding person" to fill the role as deputy secretary of state. Nonetheless, he said Huntsman will need to make a clean break from his family's business.
"He is going to need to make the same kind of clean break that Mr. Tillerson made and that Donald Trump has refused to do," said Eisen, who is now a fellow at the Brookings Institution. "This means three things: sell, recuse or get a waiver. I don't think that waiver is probably in the cards here. He will either have to do recusals, sales or a combination of both."
Given the fact that other Trump appointments have similar conflicts, that's not likely going to derail his nomination. It remains to be seen though whether Trump is willing to let one of his former critics and a proponent of the U.S.-China trade relationship into such a prominent job in the administration.


They Really Knew How to Do Populist Revolts in 1672

Johan de Witt, the boy wonder who effectively ran the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands from 1653 to 1672, was an early believer in inbox zero. In his office in the westernmost corner of the Binnenhof, the complex of buildings in The Hague that is still the nerve center of the Dutch government,
Johan worked until his desk was empty: the official letters that he had read aloud during the meeting, the envelopes from relatives, friends and other contacts, his list of decisions taken and his notes from the last meeting. He didn’t go home until everything had been dealt with.
As soon as a note was finished, he scattered sand over the lines to dry the ink, and he hung it on a wall-mounted wire -- many of Johan’s surviving letters have holes in them. This hanging stack, called a lias, also had the advantage that everything was arranged nicely together and finished work wasn’t in the way. When Johan was finished, the clerks could go to work copying everything according to his strict instructions.
That’s my translation of a passage from Dutch journalist-turned-historian Luc Panhuysen’s 2005 double biography of De Witt and his older brother and right-hand-man, Cornelis. The book is titled “De ware vrijheid,” which means “the true freedom,” Johan de Witt’s term for the two decades during which he managed his country on behalf of its merchant class, and the noble House of Orange had no say.
The brilliant, hard-working, hyper-organized Johan used that freedom to build what in modern parlance we might call a meritocratic technocracy, bent on globalization and economic growth. For a while, it was spectacularly successful. It didn’t end well, though! The brothers were killed not far from the Binnenhof in August 1672 and cut to pieces by an angry mob, with body parts finding their way to buyers as far away as England.
In these days of populist revolts against globalizing technocratic elites, the De Witts’ story seemed like it might be worth revisiting. That, and it provided a great excuse to walk around The Hague on Tuesday with the erudite and engaging Panhuysen, who has gone on to write books about the “disaster year” of 1672 and the long-running conflict, beginning the same year, between Dutch prince (and eventual English king) William III and French King Louis XIV.
“What Johan and Cornelis de Witt had to deal with was that they were regular civilian boys who at the same time had to govern and exude authority,” Panhuysen said. Political opponents could say: “God sent us the House of Orange to break us free from the Spanish. Who are these De Witt brothers?”
The De Witt boys weren’t self-made men -- their father was a successful wood merchant who bought his way into government -- but Johan in particular did rise to the top largely on merit. He was a brilliant mathematician, a translator and elaborator of the geometry of Rene Descartes. A government report that he wrote on annuity pricing is now seen as one of the founding documents of both actuarial science and financial economics.
In 1650, at age 25, Johan was chosen as raadpensionaris -- a sort of city manager -- of his hometown of Dordrecht, the oldest city in Holland, which was by far the richest and most powerful of the seven Dutch provinces. In 1653, representatives of Holland’s other cities asked him to become the province’s raadpensionaris, sometimes translated as grand pensionary. After taking 10 days to think it over, he accepted.
Since the revolt against Spain led by nobleman William of Orange, which led to Dutch independence in 1581, the Netherlands had been ruled by an uneasy collaboration between the House of Orange and the States General, the parliament of the merchant elite. That fact that the Netherlands was constantly at war, and William’s sons Maurice and Frederick Henry were both brilliant military leaders, helped hold things together for decades. But after the signing of the Peace of Muenster in 1648 ended hostilities with Spain, internal tensions grew, and in 1650 Frederick Henry’s son, William II, seized power in a coup d’etat.
After only a few months in power, though, William II died of smallpox. His only child, William III, was born soon afterwards. So when De Witt took over as grand pensionary of Holland three years later, he didn’t really have a prince of Orange to worry about. As a result he became something akin to a modern prime minister, not just of Holland but -- thanks to Holland’s strength and his own skills and work ethic -- of the entire Dutch Republic. One of his key sources of power, as Panhuysen tells it, was his command of information. He sent out regular reports on goings on in The Hague to officials in other Dutch cities, and expected similar info in return.
De Witt’s big policy priorities were paying off the war debts that the Netherlands had incurred since independence, and making the world safe for Dutch merchants. That meant big investments in the Navy, with Cornelis managing the military buildup and sometimes sailing into battle, but neglect of the army, the base of the House of Orange’s strength.
The Dutch won a few naval victories, and the economy prospered. The rich merchants benefited most (as did Johan de Witt, who grew ever wealthier through well-timed investments in government debt), but Panhuysen reports that the real incomes of Dutch workers rose 20 percent from 1650 to 1680 as well.
For the crowned heads of Europe, the success of this king-less upstart nation finally became too much to take. In 1672 the French, the English and an assortment of German princes all attacked; hence the name “disaster year.”
Meanwhile, William III had grown up -- he turned 21 in November 1671 -- and many in the Netherlands looked to him as a potential savior. Johan de Witt was extremely slow in handing military power over to the prince, and Cornelis was (falsely) accused of plotting to kill him.
The judges didn’t find Cornelis guilty, but on Aug. 20 they nonetheless banned him from Holland for life. When Johan went to Gevangenpoort prison to fetch him, a mob surrounded the brothers and forced them into a cell. After a few hours, the guards dragged them out of the Gevangenpoort, shot them repeatedly, then hung them upside down, at which point the snipping of body parts could begin.
There’s a gruesome painting of the two, post-snipping, in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. A few rooms away is one of the museum’s most famous works, Jan Asselijn’s “The Threatened Swan,” which is said to be an allegory symbolizing Johan de Witt fighting for his nation (it was painted early in his time in office).
In The Hague, meanwhile, you can do a De Witt brothers walking tour in just a few minutes. Heading west from the corner of the Binnenhof where Johan had his office, you first encounter a herring stand on the spot of a failed assassination attempt of Johan earlier in 1672 and then, across the street, the Gevangenpoort, now a museum with, among other possessions, a 1665 collection of Moliere’s comedies that was probably the last thing Cornelis read in jail. Outside, just to the north, is a big statue of Johan, erected in 1918 near the spot where he and Cornelis were killed. A few doors up the street, at Kneuterdijk 6, is Johan’s gigantic brick house, which is now used for official receptions. And back across the Hofvijver pond to the east is the Historical Museum of The Hague, where Jacob’s tongue and Cornelis’s finger are on display. Such a fun family outing!
Is it at all relevant to modern politics? Well, at least a little. The public’s resentment of the De Witt brothers lives on in today’s dislike of professional elites, and its embrace of William III bears some parallels to the enthusiasm for populist leaders such as Donald Trump, Marine Le Pen and the Netherlands’ own Geert Wilders.
One thing about William III, though: He actually delivered, leading a successful campaign to push back the invaders. We’ll see if any of today’s technocrat-bashing populists can manage that.


American Industries See Two Sides of Trump

Late in election season, as pundits tried to feign uncertainty about the inevitable Clinton coronation, a few folks considered what might happen to the financial markets if Donald Trump were elected. The answer a lot of them came up with was pretty dire: a big crash. Against all predictions, Trump was elected. And then, right on schedule … the stock market indices soared to new records?
Umm, what?
That’s the question that a lot of folks in the punditocracy are asking: Why do markets seem so happy about Trump? While Washington is swooning in despair at the incompetence of his early days -- the late-night Twitter storms, the failure to even fill the staff jobs he’ll need to get anything done, the total absence of anything resembling a detailed policy plan -- Wall Street seems pretty pleased with how things are going. Why the disconnect?
So when I sat down to listen to Trump’s speech tonight, I asked myself how this would sound to folks on Wall Street, or businessfolk elsewhere. The answer I came back with was that it probably sounded a lot like his earlier pronouncements: a decidedly mixed bag.
On the one hand, lower corporate taxes! Pipeline approvals! A trillion dollars for infrastructure! A less ponderous and fussy FDA!
On the other hand, Fair Trade (pronounced “protectionism”), immigration crackdowns and a jeremiad against “artificially high” prescription drug prices. And where’s he getting that trillion dollars, anyway?
For businesses, in other words, there’s a Good Trump and a Bad Trump. Wall Street seems to have decently strong faith that Good Trump will do what he promises, while Bad Trump is probably just saying that stuff to keep the voters pacified, but doesn’t really mean it.
Like most Washingtonians, I think that Wall Street fundamentally misunderstands how stuff happens in my city. Good Trump is promising stuff that will cost an astronomical amount of money. To make good on those promises, he will need to get bills through Congress. Those bills will have to be scored by the Congressional Budget Office, which is going to report, correctly, that they will cost an astronomical amount of money. Good Trump is going to have to prioritize, or confess to voters that he’s sticking their grandchildren with the bill for his warm personal gift to the corporation that shipped jobs overseas.
Bad Trump, on the other hand, is promising popular-sounding stuff that can often be accomplished, at least in part, by the executive branch without new legislation. If I had to bet on which Trump will predominate, I’d put my money on nativism, not tax reform.
This speech doesn’t really move that needle. Of course, “business” is not monolithic; certain industries were undoubtedly keenly interested in what he had to say tonight. Health-care companies, for example, were probably hanging on every word as he gave the most detailed outline yet of his vision for an Obamacare replacement. (Not very detailed, and basically a restatement of the tentative consensus among Republicans. But baby steps.) Pharmaceutical companies were undoubtedly riveted by his discussion of drug prices and the FDA, though I doubt many of them would willingly accept price controls or weakened patent protection in exchange for somewhat faster regulatory approvals.
But most of the companies that stand to benefit from the policies he outlined -- heavy construction companies and small manufacturers threatened by foreign competition, for example -- didn’t really hear anything new, though I’m sure they were glad of a recommitment in a major speech. And most of the industries that stand to lose, such as those that employ large numbers of low-skilled immigrants, were probably unsurprised to hear him reiterate his desire to shield American workers from foreign competition.
I will be surprised if American stock markets react strongly to this speech in either direction. For now, I expect that investors will keep betting on Good Trump, at least until he decisively proves them wrong. And at that point … well, in hindsight, some predictions turn out to be flatly wrong. Others, in the fullness of time, stand revealed as extraordinarily prescient -- just slightly premature.


Remember James Carville? Democrats Should

It was a gloomy weekend for Democrats hoping to unify in opposition to President Donald Trump. Fresh from a divisive power struggle at the Democratic National Committee meeting in Atlanta, party leaders found themselves asked to choose between embracing their anti-establishment wing and empowering the moderates those insurgents want to purge.
Here’s some good advice from one of their best strategic thinkers: Do both.
James Carville, who ran Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential campaign and stays in touch with Democrats around the country, says it would be a mistake to antagonize the activists who have led a national anti-Trump uprising.
"Those Democrats out there aren't waiting for orders from headquarters; they're giving the orders," Carville said in an interview on Monday.
There are several reasons Democrats in Washington would do well to listen to Carville. Even today, few Democrats possess his shrewd political instincts, and he's the only person in more than eight decades to manage a campaign that unseated a Republican president seeking re-election. That's what Democrats probably will face in 2020.
That also makes him part of a Democratic establishment that’s fretting about supposed risks from embracing a strategy of all-out opposition to the president. So he’s well placed to reassure them that there’s no political downside to fighting Trump.
"Democratic voters think a) the Russians stole the election for Trump, b) the guy is off his rocker and c) he's wrong about everything," Carville said.
There’s a test coming for whether the grass-roots outpouring of the past 40 days is translating into voting power. That’ll be a special election set for April 18 for the suburban Atlanta congressional seat of Tom Price, who left the House of Representatives after being named Secretary of Health and Human Services. The district hasn't elected a Democrat in more than four decades, and Price won last November by almost 25 percentage points. But Trump beat Hillary Clinton in his district by less than two percentage points and Democrats are pouring money and energy into the contest.
"This is the kind of Republican district we have to win if Democrats are going do well in 2018," Carville said, predicting that an upset victory would send shock waves through Republican congressional ranks.
Still, Carville is right to be frustrated by a left-wing challenge to the party’s preferred choice in the Virginia gubernatorial race this fall, which is also a must-win for the party.
"If there is any one state where we might trust the establishment, it's Virginia," Carville said, noting that both U.S. Senate seats and top state offices all are held by Democrats, and have been for most of this century.
While enthusiastic about the party’s liberal activists -- he's a big fan of Senator Elizabeth Warren -- he ridicules Democrats who want to drive out conservatives and moderates like Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia.
"Let them go to West Virginia and try to get elected,” Carville said. “Churches and parties that try to ban heretics do a lot worse than churches and parties that try to win converts. Any talk about purges is crazy."
Is it too early for Democrats to start thinking about the next presidential election? "Asking politicians now to not think about 2020 is like asking an 18-year-old college freshman not to think about sex."
In that spirit, Carville is watching Senator Mark Warner. The Virginia lawmaker, no favorite of the wing led by Warren and Senator Bernie Sanders, is the ranking Democrat on the Intelligence Committee, which is supposed to be investigating any ties between Russia and the Trump campaign. Warner has forcefully pushed this inquiry, taking on committee Chairman Richard Burr of North Carolina, who seems more intent on sidetracking any inquiry and cooperating with the White House.
Warner "is a dog with a bone and he's not going to let go," said Carville who, like many Democrats, thinks the Trump-Russia relationship could turn into the biggest scandal since Watergate. He argues that the administration's ethical transgressions will be a major issue in the 2018 and 2020 elections.
He doubts that any cooperation with Trump is possible given the animosity Democrats feel toward a president who has become even more divisive since he was inaugurated on Jan. 20.
"Oh, maybe if he came up with a well-thought-out publicly financed infrastructure plan he'd get Democrats, but that's not going to happen," Carville said.
Carville was the man who created the most memorable campaign mantra in recent times, for Clinton in 1992: “It's the economy, stupid." Now he has a Democratic slogan for 2020 to propose: "We tried going back; now let's go forward."


Where the Sanders Wing Can Have a Bigger Impact

Let's talk democracy, and the difficulties and opportunities involved in newly energized citizens.
I didn't write about the contentious contest for Democratic National Committee chair while it was underway because, as others have said, it just doesn't matter very much. The DNC chair raises money, runs a marginally important bureaucracy, and may wind up speaking for the party on cable news shows that practically no one watches. New chair Tom Perez comes from the same mainstream liberal wing of the party as does his narrowly defeated foe, Keith Ellison. The election will almost certainly have no effect on who wins the 2018 elections, Democratic strategy in opposing Donald Trump, the 2020 presidential nomination outcome, or really anything.
Still, the frustrations of those who strongly supported Ellison and feel defeated by the process and the party are still quite real, and those who also supported Bernie Sanders for the 2016 nomination and feel doubly defeated by the party have understandable feelings about it, even if objectively they simply lost fair and square.
There are two ways to look at it.
One is that it is incredibly difficult to take over a party. As Will Cubbison argued on Twitter over the weekend, "If you want to change the direction of the party be prepared and have a plan to organize tens of thousands of almost full time activists." He means the formal party at the national level, the Democratic National Committee, and he's correct. It is, as Cubbison points out, a pyramid-style structure and one needs to capture seats from the bottom up in order to capture the top. And, yes, organizations such as this one (or its Republican counterpart -- all of this applies to both parties) tend to have rules which give advantages to those already involved. Rules aren't even the main barrier; the current party organization has advantages of relationships and knowledge that make outright defeating them difficult at best.
On top of that is just the massive scale involved. The Democratic Party is one of two major national parties in a nation of over 300 million citizens. Of course it's difficult to turn such an organization around rapidly, at least for any relatively small group -- and tens of thousands still constitute a small group in a polity of that size.
Beyond that: Politics is frustrating by its nature. One cannot hope to win even in a much smaller jurisdiction without entering into alliances with people who are involved for often completely different reasons -- people who may simply be very different, on all sorts of dimensions. We get involved in politics, often, because of a fierce rage for justice on some issue or another, but it's never going to be true that everyone else feels that rage, and some flat-out disagree. That's bad enough if they are on the other side (and it can be chalked up to malevolence), but if one has to form a coalition with those folks in order to have any chance of winning? Well, that can be -- is -- painful. And the basic condition of U.S. politics, with two broad-based political parties, means each party must necessarily be a coalition.
But that's just one way of looking at it.
As hard as it is to take control of a national party in such a large nation, it turns out both major parties are incredibly permeable. The doors are open.
That's true of the formal party organizations. Show up at a party meeting, perhaps with a few (or a few dozen) friends, and in a very short time it's not at all hard in almost every precinct in the U.S. to be a real player at that level, and before long in many places at the county level.
The even better news is that one can ignore that entire hierarchy and still become meaningfully involved, and even influential, in the party. That's because U.S. political "expanded" parties are composed of both formal organizations and informal networks. In practical terms, that means one can jump in at any level of electioneering.
Indeed, there are hundreds of winnable elections in the U.S. for which the Democrats (or the Republicans) fail to field any candidate at all or, in some cases, only have a placeholder candidate. Winning the nominations for these contests is entirely plausible, even for a fairly small group of newbies. If you can win a nomination, you already have influence within the party; win the election, and you have more. More good news: The candidate who wins that election with your help is going to pay a whole lot more attention to your preferences than to what the national committee chair wants -- or even, in most cases, what the state party chair or the county party chair wants. Politicians care a lot about their strongest supporters.
Capturing, or perhaps influencing, a handful of state legislators, a city council, or a few school boards -- or even a U.S. House seat -- may not be as glamorous as winning a national party chair contest. But each of those positions has real ability to affect public policy (something a national party chair can only potentially do indirectly at best).
There's more. Parties are made up of politicians, campaign and governing professionals, donors and activists, formal party officials and staff, and party-aligned interest groups and media. Anyone can jump in -- and indeed one can start new groups that can potentially wield influence within the party.
The truth is that both Democrats and Republicans are eager to bring in new people, especially those with useful resources such as money, volunteer time and energy, expertise, or the ability to produce significant numbers of votes. The extent to which those already in the party may resist new policy ideas depends on many things, but ultimately in most cases the parties are going to attempt to accommodate any new group which can realistically promise to help win elections.


Both Parties Are Moving Toward the Middle on Fiscal Policy

As conservative activists descend on Washington for the Conservative Political Action Conference, a surprising reality has set in: The Republican Party is no longer the party of tax cuts. Leaders are still saying some tax-cut-friendly things, but the party's heart isn't in it. On fiscal policy, they're moving toward the middle. Democrats are likely to do the same over the next couple of election cycles.
The Republican agenda on its big-ticket items -- health-care reform and tax reform -- has stalled in part because of the party's change of heart on fiscal policy. On health-care reform, leaders are caught between promises to immediately repeal the Affordable Care Act and the reality that many residents of key Trump-friendly states like Arkansas, Kentucky and West Virginia benefited from Obamacare's expansion of Medicaid. What began as "repeal Obamacare" evolved into "repeal and replace," and then became "repeal at some point and replace at some point," and now is much closer to just "repair Obamacare." Tom Cotton, the savvy Republican senator from Arkansas who may be to Trumpism what Ted Cruz was to the tea party, admitted in a town hall last night that "Obamacare has helped Arkansans."
Tax reform is on hold until health-care reform gets done, because the tax reform process hinges on a new revenue baseline that could change with reform or repeal of Obamacare. And tax reform has problems of its own, as the House plan led by Speaker Paul Ryan and Representative Kevin Brady includes a contentious border adjustment tax that would raise revenue by taxing imports; this would pay for a significant corporate tax cut. That's been met with resistance in the Senate, as retailers hate the proposal. What nobody seems interested in for now is a simple cutting of tax rates if it means a higher budget deficit.
There are more signs of Republican dissent beyond Congress. The Republican-led Kansas House of Representatives voted this week by a wide margin to expand Medicaid in the state. The Kansas House has also clashed with the Republican governor over raising personal income taxes to balance the budget; the legislature, voted to raise the tax by overriding his veto. (The Republican-led Senate narrowly sided with the governor, so the income tax is not going up.) In Michigan, a Republican plan to cut personal income taxes supported by House Speaker Tom Leonard but opposed by Governor Rick Snyder failed.
The party's internal disagreements on fiscal policy may be irreconcilable in this congressional session. But that doesn't mean Democrats should gloat, because the same internal disagreement is headed their way. While the party might be led spiritually now by liberals like Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, their influence is at a high point, and frankly, what elected Democrats believe in this congressional term doesn't really matter. They don't have the votes to take action.
What we know is that the growth prospects for the Democratic Party revolve around wealthy, Sun Belt districts that preferred either Mitt Romney or Hillary Clinton to Donald Trump. And the Democrats in those districts in 2018 who knock off Republicans aren't going to want their first votes in 2019 to be to raise taxes or expand the size of government. Democratic leadership will seek to insulate them from tough votes.
So while partisanship and polarization are seemingly getting worse by the day, in the area of fiscal policy at least, we may be witnessing both parties moving toward a similar place. Heartland and Appalachian Republicans appear more flexible on health care than they did a few months ago, and signs at the state level suggest they might be willing to raise taxes to pay for needed services. The new Republican Party's stances on trade and immigration may cost them some of their wealthy suburban districts who represented the party's traditional conservative stances on taxes and spending, leaving the remaining members of the party more flexible on fiscal policy. And as Democrats incorporate these new wealthy suburban districts into the fold, they may become more moderate, or even conservative on fiscal policy.
Health-care reform and comprehensive immigration reform may be off the table, but the two parties appear closer on fiscal issues than they have in a long time.


Markets Are Right to Take a Le Pen Presidency Seriously

Political soothsayers remain convinced that National Front leader Marine Le Pen won’t succeed in her bid to become French president in the country’s two-stage election. Traders and investors seem less relaxed about the outcome. After the shocks of the U.K. voting for Brexit and Donald Trump becoming U.S. president, they’re right to be taking out extra insurance.
According to figures compiled by the website Oddschecker.com, the three main candidates are now neck-and-neck to become the next French president, based on the odds available from bookmakers. Republican candidate Francois Fillon has recovered ground lost during revelations he paid his family as staff members, while independent candidate Emmanuel Macron has slipped in the betting:
The only constant in the race is Le Pen. A poll by Elabe for L’Express magazine, published on Tuesday, repeated what other surveys have shown, namely that the National Front chief wins the first round on April 23, and gets defeated in the second ballot on May 7.
But the poll also showed her narrowing the gap to both Fillon and Macron in that second round, garnering support of more than 40 percent for the first time. Against Fillon, for example, she’d lose by a margin of 44 percent to 56 percent. For many onlookers, that gap is too close for comfort.
As a result, French borrowing costs have been heading higher, with the 10-year yield surpassing 1 percent for the first time in a year. But it’s the yield spread to Germany, the euro region’s benchmark borrower, that’s showing the most stress, reaching its widest since July 2012:
Traders have also driven up three-month implied volatility for the euro in recent weeks. The volatility measure is at its highest level since June, when it briefly peaked after the U.K. referendum decision to leave the European Union. The current wrangles over Greece probably aren’t helping sentiment. But the jump echoes Le Pen’s improvement in the polls in recent weeks, suggesting French election concern is the key driver:
Le Pen says she plans to redenominate the bulk of French government debt into new French francs, a move that Bank of France Governor Francois Villeroy de Galhau says could add as much as 30 billion euros ($32 billion) to the nation’s annual debt servicing costs.
Even President Le Pen would face several obstacles to implementing any such proposal, as my Bloomberg Intelligence colleague Maxime Sbaihi has argued. She’d need to persuade the National Assembly and the Senate to back her; but her party is unlikely to be in a position to do that after June parliamentary elections. She’d then need to win the resulting referendum in a nation where only 37 percent of respondents to the European Commission’s Eurobarometer survey view the euro as a “bad thing,” compared with 53 percent seeing it as a “good thing.”
But the emergence of an anti-euro leader in one of the European project’s founding members would be enough to undermine confidence about the future of both the common currency and the EU itself, even if Le Pen proved unable to carry out her “Frexit” threat. Perhaps more to the point, Le Pen’s economic program inspires no confidence that under her France will tackle the reforms it badly needs.
The double surprise of the Trump presidency and the Brexit referendum has undermined trust in opinion polls, which have a good track record in France. But there’s no doubting the renewed willingness of voters to send a strong message. Financial markets are right to be on guard.


White House Management 101

President Donald Trump’s rocky start should come as no surprise. He has no experience in government or large organizations -- his company is a small family office that employs a few dozen people. Before finding success through television and licensing deals, his career was defined by a series of failures and bankruptcies. The image he has cultivated for himself as the CEO of a global empire is even more spurious than a degree from Trump University.
Still, the level of ineptitude has been staggering -- leaving his administration in disarray, stalling his agenda in Congress, and shaking U.S. allies’ confidence in American leadership. For the country’s sake, much less his own, Trump needs get the hang of the job quickly. But how? Here, in the bullet points he is said to prefer, are here are a few management principles he might find useful.
Respect your workforce. Trump frequently extols the virtues of “our men and women in uniform,” and they deserve the praise. But they are not alone. The federal government has more than 2.5 million civilian employees; most of them are hard-working and professional. Trump has had hardly a good word for them, and he has likened the intelligence agencies to Nazi Germany and Vladimir Putin’s Russia. No wonder there have been so many intelligence leaks. An effective executive gets the most out of his or her employees by challenging and inspiring them, which begins with setting a respectful tone. Attempting to stamp out leaks through fear and intimidation, or muzzling what agencies can say about climate change, will only backfire.
Keep your team in the loop. Vice President Mike Pence learned through the news media that National Security Adviser Michael Flynn lied to him about a conversation with the Russian ambassador, even though Trump had known it for two weeks. Special adviser Kellyanne Conway went on television to declare that Trump had “full confidence” in Flynn just hours before Trump fired him. The Department of Homeland Security seemed to be caught off-guard by Trump’s executive order placing a temporary ban on immigration from seven countries. The failure to work as a team leads to infighting and media distractions, as well as to policies that are poorly thought through and badly implemented. It’s up to the executive to make sure that key staff members are not left in the dark.
Don’t alienate your allies. Trump’s curt call with Australia’s prime minister needlessly insulted an important ally. His demand that another close ally, Mexico, agree to pay for a U.S. border wall caused the cancellation of a meeting with its president and stirred up Mexican resentment. His refusal to accept any Syrian refugees has left European leaders questioning the U.S.’s claim to moral authority in global affairs. These are all examples of hubris. The U.S. has enough enemies in the world. The president should not be making more of them.
Empower your top lieutenants. Attracting talented private-sector leaders into government requires giving them the autonomy to be innovative and run their own shops. Without that, many will refuse to serve, as Trump is now learning. Such autonomy begins with allowing agency heads to hire their own teams without political interference. Yet the White House has vetoed various hires, usually for the worst of all reasons: They were critical of Trump during the campaign. To state the obvious, Trump needs more competent people in his administration. Blacklisting those who criticized candidate Trump eliminates a large pool of qualified people. Trump should recognize that the campaign is over, and that he has nothing to gain -- and the country has much to lose -- from holding grudges.
It’s true that a certain amount of awkwardness, even incompetence, is normal for any new president. It’s a tough job with a steep learning curve. All the more important for the president to begin applying some basic management principles in the White House.


The Republican War on Deficits Is a Show About Nothing

Kevin Drum spots a great quote from Republican Senator Bob Corker, who is concerned about Republican hypocrisy: "I hope we’re not going to a place where all of the sudden, because we’re in office, we don’t think the deficit matters anymore."
I want to reassure Corker, Drum, and everyone else (and there are a lot of them) who think Republicans only care about federal budget deficits when Democrats are in office. Nope. The truth is that most Republicans -- there are some exceptions, but not many -- never care about federal budget deficits. They do talk about them strategically, so they sound hypocritical. But if you watch what they support, the truth is that most congressional Republicans and their allies flat-out reject the entire notion of budgeting.
I've explained this before, but with budget season rolling around soon, it's time for a refresher.
Budget deficits are, of course, the difference between revenues and spending. Call that, I don't know, the technical definition.
War-on-budgeting Republicans appear to be talking about something very different when they talk "deficits." They aren't comparing revenues to spending at all. Instead, they appear to be comparing revenues to what they consider the ideal amount of revenues, and spending on various programs to ideal spending on those programs.
If one thinks like that, then raising taxes isn't merely a bad way to cut government deficits; it actually adds to the "deficit," if we assume taxes are currently at or above ideal levels. Similarly, cutting spending on the Pentagon won't reduce the deficit if military spending is below ideal levels, it will add to the deficit by increasing the distance between current spending and proper spending.
Is this really how most Republicans think?
I can't get inside their heads, but it certainly seems to explain what they say and what they propose.
It explains, for example, why Republicans insisted, regardless of what the Congressional Budget Office reported, that Obamacare would increase the deficit. After all, it raised taxes away from where they "should" be, and increased spending on a social program that, they believe, government shouldn't be spending on. It also explains why, when Republicans did decide to increase spending on health care by creating Medicare Part D, they didn't find it necessary to fund it. Or why George W. Bush never requested, and Republican Congresses never attempted to pass, tax increases to pay for wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Moreover, it explains why Republicans since the mid-1990s have tended to oppose "PayGo" budget procedures which require Congress to offset new spending increases and revenue decreases.
War-on-budgeting thinking is also consistent with Republican insistence on "dynamic scoring" on taxes, the estimation technique which incorporates assumptions about the effects of cuts on the overall economy (Spoiler alert: The results wind up producing lower figures for lost revenues). True deficit hawks would prefer an, ahem, conservative method of estimating the effects of tax cuts. Better to be wrong in the direction of receiving more money than expected (and therefore lower actual federal budget deficits) than to be wrong in the direction of receiving less money, and creating larger actual federal budget deficits, than expected. If however it's the "deficit" between current tax rates and ideal tax rates that's the issue, then better to fudge the revenue estimates because proper tax rates, not the revenues they produce, is the main goal.
Even Donald Trump gives Republican lip service to reducing the deficit -- one of his big talking points during the campaign was the total government debt, although he did seem quite foggy on what that actually meant. But while his priorities aren't always what orthodox conservatives want, his overall approach of supporting higher domestic spending, higher military spending, and slashing taxes as a method for eliminating the entire debt is sort of an exaggerated version of the war on budgeting.
Republicans still have plenty of room for internal arguments on, say, how much should be spent on health care or the military. But the deficit has nothing to do with it for them. And, yes, there are some Republicans inside and outside of Congress who really do care about actual federal government deficits, but they're the exception.
All of this isn't about bashing Republicans; it's about understanding what they are fighting about. For example, take the Politico item Drum quoted from, which frames the intra-Republican debate as one between Pentagon spending and budget-balancing. That's the wrong way to think about it. Instead, think of it as between one side which thinks military spending is just too low -- and another group which is relatively indifferent about that but sees an opportunity to lower spending on other, unrelated things, spending categories which they would prefer to cut regardless of what happens to the military.
The budget, for most Republicans? That has nothing to do with anything.


Republicans' Gerrymandering Could End Up Helping Democrats

The Tea Party wave of 2010 cost the Democrats the House, and then Republicans gerrymandered congressional districts to remain in power. But drawing districts with the intention of helping your party is an act of statistical modeling, and all models have assumptions, biases and flaws. A midterm election with an unpopular Republican president will reveal some of the flaws in the Republican Party's gerrymandering. The redrawn lines may even benefit Democrats.
The House gerrymander that Democrats complain about is mostly a phenomenon in five states -- Michigan, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Virginia. President Barack Obama carried all five states in 2008, yet after the 2010 Census, Republicans in those states drew district maps that were very favorable to their party. Those five states have a combined 73 seats in the House -- currently 52 Republicans and 21 Democrats. Those 73 seats are all held by the party favored to hold those districts, according to the Cook Partisan Voting Index.
The Cook PVI measures how much a district leans Republican or Democrat relative to the national average, as measured by an average of the most recent two presidential elections. If Democrats won a national election by two percentage points, as they did in 2016, a Cook PVI score of D+2 would mean that a district is 2 percent more Democratic than the national average, or a nominal Democratic margin of four points.
Drawing districts in such a way that your party benefits is a delicate operation. If you're a Republican and you have 10 districts to work with, you might be tempted to tilt as many of them as possible toward your party -- say, by creating eight R+1 or R+2 districts. But those eight seats would be vulnerable. If instead you choose to make four of the 10 districts solidly Republican -- for instance, R+10 districts -- you give yourself some safe seats but put extra territory in play for Democrats to take advantage of. With partisanship as entrenched as it currently is, the sweet spot has been around R+4 or R+5, a margin presumed to be safe in normal elections.
The five heavily gerrymandered states mentioned above show this in action. Of the 21 Democratic seats, 19 are D+8 or higher, with the other two being a D+4 and a D+6. Even in a historic Republican landslide, Democrats might only have those two seats at risk. Yet the Republican list looks much different. Fourteen seats are R+4 or less, with an additional 10 seats being R+5 or R+6. Trying to distribute their supporters across as many districts as possible, Republicans created many weakly Republican districts rather than a few strongly Republican districts. The party gambled on politics as usual. And then Donald Trump became president. If you're a Democrat, this is where your ears perk up.
Polarization is high in the recent political climate, but so is congressional turnover. Democrats picked up 30 seats in the 2006 midterms and another 21 in 2008. Then Republicans picked up 63 seats in 2010, and after giving a few seats back in 2012, expanded their margin in 2014.
Midterm elections tend to have lower turnout than presidential years. We don't yet know what the demographic makeup will be of a Trump midterm election. For all we know, Republican-leaning working-class white men will stay home, while Democratic-leaning women and college-educated voters are mobilized.
And at this point in the presidency, Trump is currently the least popular president ever. Much can change over the next 21 months. But if things don't improve for him, there's no reason to think he and his party would be any different than every other unpopular president heading into a midterm election.
Here's where the "Republican gerrymander" could help Democrats. In a big enough anti-Trump wave, the R+4 districts intended to favor Republicans could tip toward Democrats.
After the Democratic waves of 2006 and 2008, the Republican wave of 2010, and Trump's unexpected election, pundits must question their assumptions -- and those of the Republican Party. Its gerrymander could cost it the House.


President Trump's Boris Yeltsin Moment

President Donald Trump is irritated about the media furor surrounding the departure of his national security adviser. "The real scandal here is that classified information is illegally given out by 'intelligence' like candy. Very un-American!" he tweeted on Wednesday. Of course it's un-American -- it's Russian, 1990s-style.
Immediately after Trump's victory, Andrei Korobkov, a Russian-born political science professor at Middle Tennessee State University, published a lengthy article (an English translation can be found here) discussing the resemblance between Trump and Boris Yeltsin, Russia's first president. Korobkov described both men as establishment figures who turned against the ruling elite while managing to sell this turnaround to voters. Both protested against the specific forms of political correctness that dominated their countries' public discourse. In both cases, the establishment fought back angrily, Korobkov wrote:
During the election, the American elites acted in a manner that is reminiscent of the actions of the communist nomenklatura in 1987-1991. This led to what could be called the "Yeltsin effect": The campaign against Trump was so aggressive and shameless that it riled up a significant portion of the electorate. In the USSR, too, a big percentage of the population voted not so much for Yeltsin and his concrete proposals, as against the unscrupulous game of the communist nomenklatura, its control over various aspects of life, including media, and, also as an act of protest against the corruption of the elites, both material and moral.
The breakup of the Soviet Union put Yeltsin at the top of a government pyramid he had never quite commanded during Soviet times. The "deep state" -- the security and intelligence apparatus in particular, but also the entrenched bureaucracies of the huge ministries -- were used to running, and attempting to plan, every aspect of the country's life. Yeltsin appointed his people to the top jobs, but the appointees often failed to conjure the kind of mastery of these complex hierarchies required to overhaul them. In five years as foreign minister, young, pro-Western Andrei Kozyrev made little progress towards remaking the Soviet foreign relations machine, and the diplomatic service heaved a sigh of relief when a strong traditionalist, Yevgeni Primakov, took Kozyrev's place in 1996.
Yeltsin fought the "deep state" by liberalizing the economy so that the old bureaucracy had less to regulate, and he constantly kept the security services on their toes by merging and unmerging various agencies. During his first term in power, the former KGB turned into a Security Ministry (which also included the Interior Ministry, the KGB's rival service in many areas), then into the Federal Counterintelligence Service, then into the Federal Security Service (known by the Russian acronym FSB). Even after acquiring the current name, the service underwent constant reorganizations, and Yeltsin kept some integral parts of the KGB, such as technical intelligence and Kremlin security, separate. Yeltsin kept these institutions off balance, knowing they could turn into a dangerous center of power that could topple him with the help of his political rivals -- people to whom the Soviet Union's demise was a tragedy.
They were always around, trying to impeach Yeltsin first in 1993 and then in 1999. During the second attempt, Yeltsin was accused, among other things, of weakening Russia and aiding its geopolitical adversaries. A parliamentary majority voted to impeach on every count, but a qualified majority necessary to throw Yeltsin out of the Kremlin wasn't reached.
Yeltsin's Kremlin was notoriously leaky. The first Russian leader could never find enough people who were both loyal and honest, and they always squabbled among themselves. The warring factions were a journalist's bonanza. Unlike in Trump's Washington, administration officials would sometimes even scorn anonymity to speak out against one Yeltsin move or another. In 1998, about 18 months before Yeltsin abruptly resigned, Kremlin employees were openly saying he might be too sick to govern and picking sides in the next election.
With Trump today, Americans are seeing many of the same signs: A bureaucracy muttering rebelliously, openly hostile intelligence services, political appointees without a network or even a core of ideological backers in their departments, warring factions among presidential staffers, the ghost of impeachment proceedings and leaks, leaks, leaks.
Yeltsin was far less thin-skinned than Trump: He respected the media, never moved against them and did little to shut up leakers. But then, also unlike Trump, he drank to mute the pain of governing, and he didn't have a Twitter account. Besides, it was in Yeltsin's power to shake up the intelligence services and keep them weak -- but Trump can only fume and keep denying that he intends to hand the U.S. to Putin on a platter or even lift sanctions imposed on Russia for annexing Crimea.
Trump's ill-wishers in the Washington bureaucracy have all the tools the entrenched Soviet bureaucracy had against Yeltsin. Trump doesn't even have Yeltsin's power over them, though I'm sure he would like Putin's. Under the current Russian president, neither the Kremlin nor the intelligence services leak anything unless he's OK with it.
Yeltsin was ultimately unsuccessful. He didn't serve out his second term, and Putin rolled back most of his liberal reforms. Trump's chances aren't even as good as Yeltsin's. If he fails, some Putin allies in Moscow -- if not the dictator himself -- may rue a wasted opportunity. But it'll be a Putin moment -- the revanche of a government machine over a colorful individual. Very un-American; very Russian.


One Nation, Divisible by What Scares Us Most

It’s a dangerous world. The threats are insidious, lurking undetected until it’s too late. Left on your own, you won’t survive. The government’s job is to protect you.
Many Americans hold some version of this view. But they strongly differ on which threats they fear.
Red America worries about deliberate human action. Blue America dreads unintended, usually inanimate, threats. Red America focuses mostly on the body politic. Blue America emphasizes the body. In the pre-Trump era, that meant conservatives talked about crime, foreign enemies, and moral decay while liberals emphasized environmental poisons, illness, unwanted pregnancies, and material deprivation. As we’ll see, Donald Trump added a twist of his own (and jettisoned the old conservative moral concerns). But the basic people-vs.-things division remains.
Consider two recent New York Times headlines. One frets that “Trump’s F.D.A. Pick Could Undo Decades of Drug Safeguards,” appealing to liberal fears of bad medicines. A second declares that “Trump’s Travel Ban, Aimed at Terrorists, Has Blocked Doctors.” Where the administration sees a human threat, the Times finds a benefit that addresses biological vulnerability.
Or take Donald Trump Jr.’s infamous comparison of Syrian refugees to a bowl of Skittles in which a few of the candies are poisoned. A colorful variation on the standard probability example of pulling balls from urns, the analogy’s real flaw was that it wildly exaggerated the likelihood of jihadi supporters among Syrian refugees. But to many outraged liberals, what made it offensive, rather than merely wrong, was that it equated people with candy. “They aren’t Skittles. They’re children,” was a typical tweet. In their cultural milieu, unhealthy food is legitimately scary, the source of endless anxiety. Foreigners aren’t. Conservatives, on the other hand, worry less about toxins and more about people.
As the dueling Times headlines demonstrate, both sides suffer from the same essential blind spot: They see -- and often exaggerate -- the threats they fear, while overlooking the dangers of the policies designed to stamp out those threats. A crackdown on immigrants means small towns won’t have doctors. Excessive drug regulation keeps beneficial medicines away from patients who need them. (Indeed, as we come to understand more about genetic variation, regulatory requirements could make the most effective treatments prohibitively expensive.) Both policies could, in the name of protecting the public, actually shorten lives.
Team Red looks to law enforcement and the military for protection, Team Blue to scientists and technocrats. Each despises criticism of its protectors, whether from Black Lives Matter or regulatory skeptics. Each equates the end with the means. Intensive policing and punitive sentencing may fight crime, but they also sweep up minor offenders, sow fear of law enforcement, and shatter communities. Challenge the trade-off and you’ll have few friends on the right. Higher energy prices may fight climate change but they also stifle economic growth and hammer Rust Belt residents. Question the toll and liberals will dismiss you as anti-science.
These debates aren’t really about calculations of risks and rewards. They’re about what’s salient to whom—what scares people most. That’s why both sides so often find themselves swapping anecdotes rather than statistics. Steve Jobs’s biological father was Syrian! Refugees in Germany keep attacking people! Each hopes to make the other -- or the undecided middle -- feel what it feels.
Trump swept into office by upending the public discussion of risks. He bluntly articulated personalized fears of crime and terrorism, heightening those fears with cherry-picked statistics and portraying himself as America’s great protector. And he threw a new threat into the conservative mix. In his inaugural speech, Trump used the word “protect” again and again. “We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries making our products, stealing our companies and destroying our jobs. Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength,” he declared.
This passage is striking for two reasons. First, Trump embraces protectionism as an ideology rather than an interest-driven patchwork of ad hoc trade barriers. Second, he treats market transactions as deliberate attacks perpetrated by bad (foreign) actors. Outcomes that conservatives have traditionally regarded as the unplanned results of decentralized decisions Trump portrays as intentional injury. And of course he ignores the benefits of global trade and the costs of his “protection.”
One of the biggest such costs is economic brittleness. The strength of the American economy lies in its constant regeneration. Trying to eliminate the churn created by new products and processes, suppressing the dynamism that drives both discovery and disruption, may preserve some jobs for a while. But it makes it harder to adjust to shocks and, over the long run, it’s a prescription for stagnation.
In his 1988 book “Searching for Safety,” the late University of California-Berkeley political scientist Aaron Wildavsky laid out two alternatives for dealing with risk: anticipation, the static planning that aspires to perfect foresight, and resilience, the dynamic response that relies on having many margins of adjustment:
Anticipation is a mode of control by a central mind; efforts are made to predict and prevent potential dangers before damage is done. Forbidding the sale of certain medical drugs is an anticipatory measure. Resilience is the capacity to cope with unanticipated dangers after they have become manifest, learning to bounce back. An innovative biomedical industry that creates new drugs for new diseases is a resilient device. . . . Anticipation seeks to preserve stability: the less fluctuation, the better. Resilience accommodates variability; one may not do so well in good times but learn to persist in the bad.
Red and Blue America keep fighting over which threats warrant anticipation rather than whether that’s even the right strategy. The result is the ideal of the all-powerful president as protector -- an impossible task and an invitation to abuse. Instead of expecting the government to stamp out every risk, we’d be wiser to cultivate resilience and courage.


Why Republicans Can't Ignore Angry Voters

Republican members of Congress are feeling a bit under siege right now. Their office phones won't stop ringing, and their town hall meetings are mobbed by people angry about health care, the travel ban, various Donald Trump cabinet officials, and more.
Their reaction? Utah Republican Jason Chaffetz said the huge turnout at his town hall meeting last week was filled with people shipped in from other states -- "more of a paid attempt to bully and intimidate" than genuine constituent sentiment. This echoes what Trump himself tweeted earlier in February:
Indeed, some Republicans have been making this charge since the rallies immediately after the election in November. It is, of course, false. Just as with the Tea Party protests in 2009, there are national efforts -- such as the "indivisible" movement -- to supply the infrastructure of protest for angry rank-and-file citizens, but all of that would be worthless if a large number of citizens weren't actually angry to begin with. And we can be pretty certain there's no proof, or even evidence, of "paid protesters" for the simple reason that if Republicans had such evidence they would be supplying it every chance they got.
No one wants to believe that their ideas, or their president, are unpopular. But it's quite dangerous to the self-interest of Republicans to press these false charges, beyond the general (and important) reason that saying false things undermines one's credibility.
It's dangerous even if Republicans realize they are dealing with a popular movement denouncing Trump and the plans of Republicans in Congress and are just pretending that it's all phony. That's because Republican voters listen to their elected officials, and tend to believe them. If they believe that everything Trump and their congresspeople do is overwhelmingly popular, then they'll have no patience for delays or retreats on any of the items on the agenda. Expectations-setting is an important part of representation, after all. It's already hard enough in the best of circumstances for citizens to understand the very real difficulties for getting anything done in a Madisonian system. If members of Congress add to that false claims about the popularity of what they want to do (by treating opposition as phony), they're asking for trouble.
It's even more dangerous, of course, if politicians really believe false claims about what voters are thinking. It's unlikely that Chaffetz, who won his latest re-election by almost 50 percentage points, is going to be in any personal danger in 2018. Nor is Wisconsin's Jim Sensenbrenner, who has never received fewer than 60 percent of the votes in any of his re-election efforts. But others with only slightly more competitive districts might find themselves in trouble if they entirely dismiss opposition. California's Tom McLintock, for example, faced a packed town hall meeting last week. He's in a Republican district; Trump carried California 4 with 54 percent of the vote, down from 58 percent for Mitt Romney in 2012, and McLintock himself crushed his Democratic opponent. But this is exactly the kind of margin that can suddenly disappear in a partisan landslide, when the out-party recruits a strong challenger and the president's approval rating is in the dumps. And if districts such as McLintock's start to get shaky, then the Republican House majority would be in big trouble -- something neither Chaffetz nor Sensenbrenner want even if they protect their own seats.
It's one thing for Republican incumbents to remind everyone that they won the election, and to treat protests as the legitimate voices of what they can say is a minority. It's another to totally dismiss them.
All of this wouldn't matter so much if congressional Republicans were helpless to do anything about it. They are not. Congressional Republicans may not be able to give Trump the right experience or temperament or management skills for the job, but they can insist he hire a qualified chief of staff who has those attributes -- and use their leverage to back up those demands. Chaffetz, the chairman of the House Oversight Committee, could threaten to hold hearings on any number of administration scandals. Senate Republicans could still slow down cabinet and other executive branch confirmations until Trump agrees to their demands. And of course it's entirely up to Republicans what they choose to do on health care reform, tax cuts, or any other legislation.
Not that I'd expect Republicans to drop their agenda because of a few (tens of thousands of) phone calls and constituents showing up to ask questions. They won their elections just a few months ago. Of course they'll try to pass things they ran on. But within that agenda, there are still plenty of choices to be made, and good representatives take into account all the people in their districts. That includes what political scientist Richard Fenno called their "primary" constituency (their strongest supporters), but also their re-election constituency (those who vote for them) and their geographical constituency, or the entire district. It's healthy for a member of Congress to pay closest attention to those strongest supporters. But listening only to them, while misinforming them about district sentiment overall, is another story. One that rarely ends well.


Feisty, Protectionist Populism? New Zealand Tried That

What would you think of a Western democratic leader who was populist, obsessed with the balance of trade, especially effective on television, feisty and combative with the press, and able to take over his country’s right-wing party and swing it in a more interventionist direction?
Meet Robert Muldoon, prime minister of New Zealand from 1975 to 1984. For all the comparisons of President Donald Trump to Mussolini or various unsavory Latin American leaders, Muldoon is a clearer parallel case.
Some of the similarities are striking. Muldoon often made rude or unusually frank comments about foreign leaders (including U.S. President Jimmy Carter and the Australian prime minister), and his diplomats worked hard to undo them. When Muldoon spoke, he so often made the issue about him. His slogan was “New Zealand -- The Way You Want It.”
His most significant initiative was called “Think Big,” and, yes, it was designed to make New Zealand great again. It was based on a lot of infrastructure and fossil fuels investment, including natural gas, and it was intended to stimulate the country’s exports and remedy the trade deficit. Because New Zealand’s parliamentary system of government has fewer checks and balances than the American system, Muldoon got more done than Trump likely will.
Yet this bout of industrial policy worsened the already precarious fiscal position of the government, and Muldoon’s public-sector investments did not impress. Muldoon’s biographer, Barry Gustafson, noted that the prime minister ended up being criticized for his “apparently dogmatic arrogance of executive power”; Gustafson also tells us Muldoon “was often reluctant to take expert advice.”
Like Trump, Muldoon was at first skeptical about his country’s NAFTA deal -- yes, it was called exactly that, the New Zealand Australia Free Trade Agreement. Muldoon did renegotiate the treaty, although his ministers persuaded him to accept a free-trade-friendly update, called CER (Closer Economic Relations). Trump may or may not follow through with the second part of that parallel.
Australia aside, Muldoon preferred protectionism and had little patience for the academic arguments against it. He was no friend of free-market thinking, and when Milton and Rose Friedman visited New Zealand, the prime minister refused to meet with them.
Muldoon favored easy money; it remains to be seen whether Trump will do the same. In New Zealand, price-inflation rates ended up over 15 percent on Muldoon’s watch. He then pushed for a wage and price freeze, which worsened the economy further.
Like Trump, Muldoon faced some controversial race issues. The all-white South African rugby team was scheduled to tour New Zealand in 1981, and even after extensive protests Muldoon refused to ban the team. Muldoon’s critics called him a racist, and charged that his intentions in the matter were not entirely benign. Muldoon also continued his predecessor’s policy of arresting and deporting Pacific Islanders who had overstayed their visas.
It was his philosophy not to bother to appeal to his opponents. The more critics he generated, the more his supporters -- known as “Rob’s Mob” -- loved him.
To be sure, significant differences between Muldoon and Trump can be seen. Muldoon assumed office with political experience in Parliament and the cabinet, and, consistent with his background in accounting, he was renowned for his mastery of detail. For all his bullying, he was not regarded as a threat to democracy in the manner that Trump’s critics have alleged. Muldoon called for tougher policies toward the Soviet Union, and didn’t give his family a Trump-like role as advisers.
Arguably, Muldoon was not as outrageous as Trump. Still, he once punched demonstrators, and stripped naked at a cocktail party. Twitter remained beyond his grasp.
How did it all end? The economy became so bad that Muldoon’s National Party lost the 1984 election to Labour, the traditional left-wing party (he had called the snap election in a drunken fit of pique). Labour, however, turned its back on its history and pushed through free-market reforms, backed by significant business interests. After a stock market crash and some further volatility, the New Zealand economy finally got its act together in the 1990s. It remains to be seen if, post-Trump, the U.S. Democratic Party might end up following a similar course.
One lesson from the comparison is that a leader like Muldoon can be fairly popular, as he stayed in power from 1975 to 1984, winning three terms despite mistakes, antagonisms and policy failures. He was a plain-speaker who related well to many Kiwi voters, and he was masterful at defusing or rechanneling opposition within his own party.
After Muldoon was voted out of office, he started a popular radio talk show, “Lilies and Other Things,” which dealt with gardening, politics and the economy, all the while maintaining his fiery tone. He also played a vampire -- Count Robula -- on a late-night TV horror show, and he narrated “The Rocky Horror Picture Show.” Not exactly “The Apprentice,” but with this we have come full circle.
